<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 11</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-8" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-8-11" epub:type="chapter">
				<h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XI</h2>
<p><span class="firstword">Now</span> as widow <i>Wadman</i> did love
my uncle <i>Toby</i>——and my uncle <i>Toby</i> did not love
widow <i>Wadman</i>, there was nothing for widow <i>Wadman</i> to do,
but to go on and love my uncle <i>Toby</i>——or let it
alone.</p>
<p>Widow <i>Wadman</i> would do neither the one or the other.</p>
<p>——Gracious heaven!——but I forget I am a
little of her temper myself; for whenever it so falls out, which it
sometimes does about the equinoxes, that an earthly goddess is so much
this, and that, and t’other, that I cannot eat my breakfast for
her——and that she careth not three halfpence whether I eat
my breakfast or <span class="locked">no——</span></p>
<p>——Curse on her! and so I send her to <i>Tartary</i>, and
from <i>Tartary</i> to <i>Terra del <ins class="correction" title="spelling unchanged">Fuogo</ins></i>, and so on to the devil: in short,
there is not an infernal nitch where I do not take her divinityship and
stick it.</p>
<p>But as the heart is tender, and the passions in these tides ebb and
flow ten times in a minute, I instantly bring her back again; and
as I do all things in extremes, I place her in the very centre of
the <span class="locked">milky-way——</span></p>
<p>Brightest of stars! thou wilt shed thy influence upon some
one———</p>
<p>——The duce take her and her influence
too——for at that word I lose all patience——much
good may it do him!——By all that is hirsute and gashly!
I cry, taking off my furr’d cap, and twisting it round my
finger——I would not give sixpence for a dozen such!</p>
<p>——But ’tis an excellent cap too (putting it upon my head,
and pressing it close to my ears)—and warm—and soft;
especially if you stroke it the right way—but alas! that will
never be my luck——(so here my philosophy is shipwreck’d
again).</p>
<p>——No; I shall never have a finger in the pye (so here I
break my metaphor)——</p>
<p>Crust and Crumb</p>
<p>Inside and out</p>
<p>Top and bottom——I detest it, I hate it, I repudiate
it——I’m sick at the sight of <span class="locked">it——</span></p>
<p>’Tis all pepper,</p>
<p><span class="invisible">’Tis all </span>garlick,</p>
<p><span class="invisible">’Tis all </span>staragen,</p>
<p><span class="invisible">’Tis all </span>salt, and</p>
<p><span class="invisible">’Tis all </span>devil’s
dung——by the great arch-cook of cooks, who does nothing,
I think, from morning to night, but sit down by the fire-side and
invent inflammatory dishes for us, I would not touch it for the
world——</p>
<p>——<i>O Tristram! Tristram!</i> cried <i>Jenny</i>.</p>
<p><i>O Jenny! Jenny!</i> replied I, and so went on with the twelfth
chapter.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
