<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-5" id="chapter-5-15" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XV</h3>
			<p>Had this volume been a farce, which, unless everyone’s life and opinions are to be looked upon as a farce as well as mine, I see no reason to suppose⁠—the last chapter, Sir, had finished the first act of it, and then this chapter must have set off thus.</p>
			<p>Ptr..r..r..ing⁠—twing⁠—twang⁠—prut⁠—trut⁠⸺’tis a cursed bad fiddle.⁠—Do you know whether my fiddle’s in tune or no?⁠—trut..prut..⁠—They should be <em>fifths</em>.⁠⸺’Tis wickedly strung⁠—tr⁠ ⁠… <i epub:type="z3998:grapheme">a</i>.<i epub:type="z3998:grapheme">e</i>.<i epub:type="z3998:grapheme">i</i>.<i epub:type="z3998:grapheme">o</i>.<i epub:type="z3998:grapheme">u</i>.-twang.⁠—The bridge is a mile too high, and the sound post absolutely down,⁠—else⁠—trut . . prut⁠—hark! ’tis not so bad a tone.⁠—Diddle diddle, diddle diddle, diddle diddle, dum. There is nothing in playing before good judges,⁠—but there’s a man there⁠—no⁠—not him with the bundle under his arm⁠—the grave man in black.⁠—’Sdeath! not the gentleman with the sword on.⁠—Sir, I had rather play a <i>Caprichio</i> to <i>Calliope</i> herself, than draw my bow across my fiddle before that very man; and yet I’ll stake my <i>Cremona</i> to a <i>Jew’s</i> trump, which is the greatest musical odds that ever were laid, that I will this moment stop three hundred and fifty leagues out of tune upon my fiddle, without punishing one single nerve that belongs to him⁠—Twaddle diddle, tweddle diddle,⁠—twiddle diddle,⁠⸺⁠twoddle diddle,⁠—twuddle diddle,⁠⸺⁠prut trut⁠—krish⁠—krash⁠—krush.⁠—I’ve undone you, Sir,⁠—but you see he’s no worse,⁠—and was <i>Apollo</i> to take his fiddle after me, he can make him no better.</p>
			<p>Diddle diddle, diddle diddle, diddle diddle⁠—hum⁠—dum⁠—drum.</p>
			<p>—Your worships and your reverences love music⁠—and God has made you all with good ears⁠—and some of you play delightfully yourselves⁠—trut-prut,⁠—prut-trut.</p>
			<p>O! there is⁠—whom I could sit and hear whole days,⁠—whose talents lie in making what he fiddles to be felt,⁠—who inspires me with his joys and hopes, and puts the most hidden springs of my heart into motion.⁠—If you would borrow five guineas of me, Sir,⁠—which is generally ten guineas more than I have to spare⁠—or you <abbr>Messrs.</abbr> Apothecary and Taylor, want your bills paying,⁠—that’s your time.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
