<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 18</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-3" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-3-18" epub:type="chapter">
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVIII</h2>
				<p>It is two hours, and ten minutes⁠—and no more⁠—cried my father, looking at his watch, since <abbr>Dr.</abbr> <i>Slop</i> and <i>Obadiah</i> arrived⁠—and I know not how it happens, brother <i>Toby</i>⁠—but to my imagination it seems almost an age.</p>
				<p>⸺⁠Here⁠—pray, Sir, take hold of my cap⁠—nay, take the bell along with it, and my pantoufles too.</p>
				<p>Now, Sir, they are all at your service; and I freely make you a present of ’em, on condition you give me all your attention to this chapter.</p>
				<p>Though my father said, “<em>he knew not how it happen’d</em>,”⁠—yet he knew very well how it happen’d;⁠⸺⁠and at the instant he spoke it, was predetermined in his mind to give my uncle <i>Toby</i> a clear account of the matter by a metaphysical dissertation upon the subject of <em>duration and its simple modes</em>, in order to show my uncle <i>Toby</i> by what mechanism and mensurations in the brain it came to pass, that the rapid succession of their ideas, and the eternal scampering of the discourse from one thing to another, since <abbr>Dr.</abbr> <i>Slop</i> had come into the room, had lengthened out so short a period to so inconceivable an extent.⁠⸺“I know not how it happens⁠—cried my father,⁠—but it seems an age.”</p>
				<p>⸺’Tis owing entirely, quoth my uncle <i>Toby</i>, to the succession of our ideas.</p>
				<p>My father, who had an itch, in common with all philosophers, of reasoning upon everything which happened, and accounting for it too⁠—proposed infinite pleasure to himself in this, of the succession of ideas, and had not the least apprehension of having it snatch’d out of his hands by my uncle <i>Toby</i>, who (honest man!) generally took everything as it happened;⁠⸺⁠and who, of all things in the world, troubled his brain the least with abstruse thinking;⁠—the ideas of time and space⁠—or how we came by those ideas⁠—or of what stuff they were made⁠⸺⁠or whether they were born with us⁠—or we picked them up afterwards as we went along⁠—or whether we did it in frocks⁠⸺⁠or not till we had got into breeches⁠—with a thousand other inquiries and disputes about <b>infinity</b>, <b>prescience</b>, <b>liberty</b>, <b>necessity</b>, and so forth, upon whose desperate and unconquerable theories so many fine heads have been turned and cracked⁠⸺⁠never did my uncle <i>Toby’s</i> the least injury at all; my father knew it⁠—and was no less surprised than he was disappointed, with my uncle’s fortuitous solution.</p>
				<p>Do you understand the theory of that affair? replied my father.</p>
				<p>Not I, quoth my uncle.</p>
				<p>—But you have some ideas, said my father, of what you talk about?⁠—</p>
				<p>No more than my horse, replied my uncle <i>Toby</i>.</p>
				<p>Gracious heaven! cried my father, looking upwards, and clasping his two hands together⁠⸺⁠there is a worth in thy honest ignorance, brother <i>Toby</i>⁠⸺’twere almost a pity to exchange it for a knowledge.⁠—But I’ll tell thee.⁠⸺⁠</p>
				<p>To understand what <em>time</em> is aright, without which we never can comprehend <em>infinity</em>, insomuch as one is a portion of the other⁠⸺⁠we ought seriously to sit down and consider what idea it is we have of <em>duration</em>, so as to give a satisfactory account how we came by it.⁠⸺⁠What is that to anybody? quoth my uncle <i>Toby</i>.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-8" id="noteref-8" epub:type="noteref">8</a> <em>For if you will turn your eyes inwards upon your mind</em>, continued my father, <em>and observe attentively, you will perceive, brother, that whilst you and I are talking together, and thinking, and smoking our pipes, or whilst we receive successively ideas in our minds, we know that we do exist, and so we estimate the existence, or the continuation of the existence of ourselves, or anything else, commensurate to the succession of any ideas in our minds, the duration of ourselves, or any such other thing coexisting with our thinking⁠⸺⁠and so according to that preconceived</em>⁠⸻You puzzle me to death, cried my uncle <i>Toby</i>.</p>
				<p>⸻’Tis owing to this, replied my father, that in our computations of <em>time</em>, we are so used to minutes, hours, weeks, and months⁠⸺⁠and of clocks (I wish there was not a clock in the kingdom) to measure out their several portions to us, and to those who belong to us⁠⸺⁠that ’twill be well, if in time to come, the <em>succession of our ideas</em> be of any use or service to us at all.</p>
				<p>Now, whether we observe it or no, continued my father, in every sound man’s head, there is a regular succession of ideas of one sort or other, which follow each other in train just like⁠⸻A train of artillery? said my uncle <i>Toby</i>⁠⸺⁠A train of a fiddlestick!⁠—quoth my father⁠—which follow and succeed one another in our minds at certain distances, just like the images in the inside of a lanthorn turned round by the heat of a candle.⁠—I declare, quoth my uncle <i>Toby</i>, mine are more like a smoak-jack.⁠⸻Then, brother <i>Toby</i>, I have nothing more to say to you upon that subject, said my father.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
