<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 34</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-7" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-7-34" epub:type="chapter">
				<h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXXIV</h2>
				<p>——But it is an indubitable verity, continued I, addressing myself to the commissary, changing only the form of my asseveration⁠——that I owe the king of <i>France</i> nothing but my good-will; for he is a very honest man, and I wish him all health and pastime in the world⁠——</p>
				<p><i>Pardonnez moi</i>⁠—replied the commissary, you are indebted to him six livres four sous, for the next post from hence to St. <i>Fons</i>, in your route to <i>Avignon</i>⁠—which being a post royal, you pay double for the horses and postillion⁠—otherwise ’twould have amounted to no more than three livres two sous⁠——</p>
				<p>——But I don’t go by land; said I.</p>
				<p>——You may if you please; replied the commissary⁠——</p>
				<p>Your most obedient servant⁠——said I, making him a low bow⁠——</p>
				<p>The commissary, with all the sincerity of grave good breeding⁠—made me one, as low again.⁠——I never was more disconcerted with a bow in my life.</p>
				<p>——The devil take the serious character of these people! quoth I⁠—(aside) they understand no more of <strong>irony</strong> than this⁠——</p>
				<p>The comparison was standing close by with his panniers⁠—but something seal’d up my lips⁠—I could not pronounce the name⁠—</p>
				<p>Sir, said I, collecting myself⁠—it is not my intention to take post⁠——</p>
				<p>—But you may⁠—said he, persisting in his first reply⁠—you may take post if you chuse⁠——</p>
				<p>—And I may take salt to my pickled herring, said I, if I chuse⁠——</p>
				<p>—But I do not chuse⁠—</p>
				<p>—But you must pay for it, whether you do or no.</p>
				<p>Aye! for the salt; said I (I know)⁠——</p>
				<p>—And for the post too; added he. Defend me! cried I⁠——</p>
				<p>I travel by water⁠—I am going down the <i>Rhône</i> this very afternoon⁠—my baggage is in the boat⁠—and I have actually paid nine livres for my passage⁠——</p>
				<p><i>C’est tout egal</i>⁠—’tis all one; said he.</p>
				<p><i>Bon Dieu!</i> what, pay for the way I go! and for the way I do <i>not</i> go!</p>
				<p>——<i>C’est tout egal</i>; replied the commissary⁠——</p>
				<p>——The devil it is! said I⁠—but I will go to ten thousand Bastiles first⁠——</p>
				<p><i>O England! England!</i> thou land of liberty, and climate of good sense, thou tenderest of mothers⁠—and gentlest of nurses, cried I, kneeling upon one knee, as I was beginning my apostrophe.</p>
				<p>When the director of Madam <i>Le Blanc’s</i> conscience coming in at that instant, and seeing a person in black, with a face as pale as ashes, at his devotions⁠—looking still paler by the contrast and distress of his drapery⁠—ask’d, if I stood in want of the aids of the church⁠——</p>
				<p>I go by <strong>water</strong>⁠—said I⁠—and here’s another will be for making me pay for going by <strong>oil</strong>.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
