<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 11</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-3" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-3-11" epub:type="chapter">
				<h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XI</h2>
				<h5>
					<a id="bookIII_excomm" name="bookIII_excomm"> Textus de Ecclesiâ Roffensi, per Ernulfum Episcopum.</a>
				</h5>
				<table class="parallel" summary="parallel text">
					<tr>
						<td>
							<h4>CAP. XI<br/> EXCOMMUNICATIO<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-7" id="noteref-7" epub:type="noteref">7</a></h4>
						</td>
						<td>
							<h4>
								<a id="bookIII_chapXI" name="bookIII_chapXI"> CHAPTER XI</a>
							</h4>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td>
							<p class="plain">Ex auctoritate Dei omnipotentis, Patris, et Filij, et Spiritus Sancti, et sanctorum canonum, sanctæque et intemeratæ Virginis Dei genetricis Mariæ,—</p>
						</td>
						<td>
							<p class="plain">“By the authority of God Almighty, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and of the holy canons, and of the undefiled Virgin <i>Mary</i>, mother and patroness of our Saviour.”</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
				</table>
				<p class="plain">I think there is no necessity, quoth Dr. <i>Slop</i>, dropping the paper down to his knee, and addressing himself to my father——as you have read it over, Sir, so lately, to read it aloud——and as Captain <i>Shandy</i> seems to have no great inclination to hear it———I may as well read it to myself. That’s contrary to treaty, replied my father:———besides, there is something so whimsical, especially in the latter part of it, I should grieve to lose the pleasure of a second reading. Dr. <i>Slop</i> did not altogether like it,———but my uncle <i>Toby</i> offering at that instant to give over whistling, and read it himself to them;———Dr. <i>Slop</i> thought he might as well read it under the cover of my uncle <i>Toby’s</i> whistling———as suffer my uncle <i>Toby</i> to read it alone;——so raising up the paper to his face, and holding it quite parallel to it, in order to hide his chagrin———he read it aloud as follows————my uncle <i>Toby</i> whistling <i>Lillabullero</i>, though not quite so loud as before.</p>
				<table class="parallel" summary="parallel text">
					<tr>
						<td>
							<p>———Atque omnium cœlestium virtutum, angelorum, archangelorum, thronorum, dominationum, potestatuum, cherubin ac seraphin, &amp; sanctorum patriarchum, prophetarum, &amp; omnium apostolorum &amp; evangelistarum, &amp; sanctorum innocentum, qui in conspectu Agni soli digni inventi sunt canticum cantare novum, et sanctorum martyrum et sanctorum confessorum, et sanctarum virginum, atque omnium simul sanctorum et electorum Dei,</p>
						</td>
						<td>
							<p>“By the authority of God Almighty, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and of the undefiled Virgin <i>Mary</i>, mother and patroness of our Saviour, and of all the celestial virtues, angels, archangels, thrones, dominions, powers, cherubins and seraphins, and of all the holy patriarchs, prophets, and of all the apostles and evangelists, and of the holy innocents, who in the sight of the Holy Lamb, are found worthy to sing the new song of the holy martyrs and holy confessors, and of the holy virgins, and of all the saints, together with the holy and elect of God,——May he” (<i>Obadiah</i>) “be damn’d” (for tying these knots)</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td>
							<p class="plain">——Excommunicamus, et anathematizamus<br/> <i>vel</i> os <span class="invisible">fure</span>s<span class="invisible">, vel</span> <i>vel</i> os <span class="invisible">malefactore</span>s<br/> hunc furem, vel hunc malefactorem, N. N. et a liminibus sanctæ Dei ecclesiæ sequestramus, et æternis suppliciis<br/> <span class="invisible">excrucia</span> <i>vel</i> i <span class="invisible">, mancipe</span>n<br/> excruciandus, mancipetur, cum Dathan et Abiram, et cum his qui dixerunt Domino Deo, Recede à nobis, scientiam viarum tuarum nolumus: et sicut aquâ ignis extinguitur, sic extinguatur<br/> <i>vel</i> eorum<br/> lucerna ejus in secula seculorum nisi<br/> <span class="invisible">resipuer</span>n, <span class="invisible">et ad satisfactionem vener</span>n<br/> resipuerit, et ad satisfactionem venerit. Amen.</p>
						</td>
						<td>
							<p class="plain">——“We excommunicate, and anathematize him, and from the thresholds of the holy church of God Almighty we sequester him, that he may be tormented, disposed, and delivered over with <i>Dathan</i> and <i>Abiram</i>, and with those who say unto the Lord God, Depart from us, we desire none of thy ways. And as fire is quenched with water, so let the light of him be put out for evermore, unless it shall repent him” (<i>Obadiah</i>, of the knots which he has tied) “and make satisfaction” (for them) “Amen.”</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td>
							<p><span class="invisible">Maledicat ill</span>os</p>
							<p>Maledicat illum Deus Pater qui hominem creavit.<br/> <span class="invisible">Maledicat ill</span>os<br/> Maledicat illum Dei Filius qui pro homine passus est.<br/> <span class="invisible">Maledicat ill</span>os<br/> Maledicat illum Spiritus Sanctus qui in baptismo effusus est.<br/> <span class="invisible">Maledicat ill</span>os<br/> Maledicat illum sancta crux, quam Christus pro nostrâ salute hostem triumphans ascendit.</p>
						</td>
						<td>
							<p> </p>
							<p>“May the Father who created man, curse him.——May the Son who suffered for us, curse him.——May the Holy Ghost, who was given to us in baptism, curse him (<i>Obadiah</i>)——May the holy cross which Christ, for our salvation triumphing over his enemies, ascended, curse him.</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td>
							<p><span class="invisible">Maledicat ill</span>os</p>
							<p>Maledicat illum sancta Dei genetrix et perpetua Virgo Maria.<br/> <span class="invisible">Maledicat ill</span>os<br/> Maledicat illum sanctus Michael, animarum susceptor sacrarum.<br/> <span class="invisible">Maledicant ill</span>os<br/> Maledicant illum omnes angeli et archangeli, principatus et potestates, omnisque militia cœlestis.</p>
						</td>
						<td>
							<p> </p>
							<p>“May the holy and eternal Virgin <i>Mary</i>, mother of God, curse him.———May St. <i>Michael</i>, the advocate of holy souls, curse him.——May all the angels and archangels, principalities and powers, and all the heavenly armies, curse him.” [Our armies swore terribly in <i>Flanders</i>, cried my uncle <i>Toby</i>,———but nothing to this.———For my own part I could not have a heart to curse my dog so.]</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td>
							<p><span class="invisible">Maledicat ill</span>os</p>
							<p>Maledicat illum patriarcharum et prophetarum laudabilis numerus.<br/> <span class="invisible">Maledicat ill</span>os<br/> Maledicat illum sanctus Johannes Præcusor et Baptista Christi, et sanctus Petrus, et sanctus Paulus, atque sanctus Andreas, omnesque Christi apostoli, simul et cæteri</p>
							<p class="plain">discipuli, quatuor quoque evangelistæ, qui sua prædicatione mundum universum converterunt.<br/> <span class="invisible">Maledicat ill</span>os<br/> Maledicat illum cuneus martyrum et confessorum mirificus, qui Deo bonis operibus placitus inventus est.</p>
						</td>
						<td>
							<p> </p>
							<p>“May St. John, the Præcursor, and St. John the Baptist, and St. Peter and St. Paul, and St. Andrew, and all other Christ’s apostles, together curse him. And may the rest of his disciples and four evangelists, who by their preaching converted the universal world, and may the holy and wonderful company of martyrs and confessors who by their holy works are found pleasing to God Almighty, curse him” (<i>Obadiah</i>).</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td>
							<p><span class="invisible">Maledicant ill</span>os</p>
							<p>Maledicant illum sacrarum virginum chori, quæ mundi vana causa honoris Christi respuenda contempserunt.<br/> <span class="invisible">Maledicant ill</span>os<br/> Maledicant illum omnes sancti qui ab initio mundi usque in finem seculi Deo dilecti inveniuntur.</p>
							<p><span class="invisible">Maledicant ill</span>os</p>
							<p>Maledicant illum cœli et terra, et omnia sancta in eis manentia.</p>
						</td>
						<td>
							<p>“May the holy choir of the holy virgins, who for the honour of Christ have despised the things of the world, damn him——May all the saints, who from the beginning of the world to everlasting ages are found to be beloved of God, damn him———May the heavens and earth, and all the holy things remaining therein, damn him” (<i>Obadiah</i>) “or her” (or whoever else had a hand in tying these knots).</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td>
							<p><span class="invisible">Maledict</span>i n <span class="invisible">ubicunque fuer</span>n</p>
							<p>Maledictus sit ubicunque fuerit, sive in domo, sive in agro, sive in viâ, sive in semitâ, sive in silvâ, sive in aquâ, sive in ecclesiâ.</p>
							<p><span class="invisible">Maledict</span>i n</p>
							<p class="maledictus-lines"><span>Maledictus sit vivendo, moriendo,</span> <span><span>———</span> <span>———</span> <span>———</span></span> <span><span>———</span> <span>———</span> <span>———</span></span> <span><span>———</span> <span>———</span> <span>———</span></span> manducando, bibendo, esuriendo, sitiendo, jejunando, dormitando, dormiendo, vigilando, ambulando, stando, sedendo, jacendo, operando, quiescendo, mingendo, cacando, flebotomando.</p>
						</td>
						<td>
							<p>“May he (<i>Obadiah</i>) be damn’d wherever he be——whether in the house or the stables, the garden or the field, or the highway, or in the path, or in the wood, or in the water, or in the church.——May he be cursed in living, in dying.” [Here my uncle <i>Toby</i>, taking the advantage of a <i>minim</i> in the second bar of his tune, kept whistling one continued note to the end of the sentence.——Dr. <i>Slop</i>, with his division of curses moving under him, like a running bass all the way.] “May he be cursed in eating, and drinking, in being hungry, in being thirsty, in fasting, in sleeping, in slumbering, in walking, in standing, in sitting, in lying, in working, in resting, in pissing, in shitting, and in blood-letting!”</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td>
							<p><span class="invisible">Maledict</span>i n</p>
							<p>Maledictus sit in totis viribus corporis,</p>
						</td>
						<td>
							<p>“May he” (<i>Obadiah</i>) “be cursed in all the faculties of his body!</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td>
							<p><span class="invisible">Maledict</span>i n</p>
							<p>Maledictus sit intus et exterius.</p>
							<p><span class="invisible">Maledict</span>i n</p>
							<p>Maledictus sit in capillis;</p>
							<p class="plain"><span class="invisible">Maledict</span>i n</p>
							<p class="plain">maledictus sit in cerebro.<br/> <span class="invisible">Maledict</span>i n<br/> Maledictus sit in vertice, in temporibus, in fronte, in auriculis, in superciliis, in oculis, in genis, in maxillis, in naribus, in dentibus, mordacibus, sive molaribus, in labiis, in guttere, in humeris, in harnis, in brachiis, in manubus, in digitis, in pectore, in corde, et in omnibus interioribus stomacho tenus, in renibus, in inguinibus, in femore, in genitalibus, in coxis, in genubus, in cruribus, in pedibus, et in inguibus.</p>
						</td>
						<td>
							<p>“May he be cursed inwardly and outwardly!———May he be cursed in the hair of his head!——May he be cursed in his brains, and in his vertex” (that is a sad curse, quoth my father), “in his temples, in his forehead, in his ears, in his eye-brows, in his cheeks, in his jaw-bones, in his nostrils, in his fore-teeth and grinders, in his lips, in his throat, in his shoulders, in his wrists, in his arms, in his hands, in his fingers!</p>
							<p>“May he be damn’d in his mouth, in his breast, in his heart and purtenance, down to the very stomach!</p>
							<p>“May he be cursed in his reins, and in his groin” (God in heaven forbid! quoth my uncle <i>Toby</i>), “in his thighs, in his genitals” (my father shook his head), “and in his hips, and in his knees, his legs, and feet, and toe-nails!</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td>
							<p>Maledictus sit in totis compagibus membrorum, a vertice capitis, usque ad plantam pedis—non sit in eo sanitas.</p>
						</td>
						<td>
							<p>“May he be cursed in all the joints and articulations of his members, from the top of his head to the sole of his foot! May there be no soundness in him!</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td>
							<p>Maledicat illum Christus Filius Dei vivi toto suæ majestatis imperio.——</p>
						</td>
						<td>
							<p>“May the Son of the living God, with all the glory of his Majesty”——</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
				</table>
				<p class="plain">[Here my uncle <i>Toby</i>, throwing back his head, gave a monstrous, long, loud Whew—w—w————something betwixt the interjectional whistle of <i>Hay-day!</i> and the word itself.———</p>
				<p>——By the golden beard of <i>Jupiter</i>—and of <i>Juno</i> (if her majesty wore one) and by the beards of the rest of your heathen worships, which by the bye was no small number, since what with the beards of your celestial gods, and gods aerial and aquatick—to say nothing of the beards of town-gods and country-gods, or of the celestial goddesses your wives, or of the infernal goddesses your whores and concubines (that is in case they wore them)———all which beards, as <i>Varro</i> tells me, upon his word and honour, when mustered up together, made no less than thirty thousand effective beards upon the Pagan establishment;——every beard of which claimed the rights and privileges of being stroken and sworn by—by all these beards together then——I vow and protest, that of the two bad cassocks I am worth in the world, I would have given the better of them, as freely as ever <i>Cid Hamet</i> offered his——to have stood by, and heard my uncle <i>Toby’s</i> accompanyment.]</p>
				<table class="parallel" summary="parallel text">
					<tr>
						<td>
							<p>——et insurgat adversus illum cœlum cum omnibus virtutibus quæ in eo moventur ad <i>damnandum</i> eum, nisi penituerit et ad satisfactionem venerit. Amen. Fiat, fiat. Amen.</p>
						</td>
						<td>
							<p>——“curse him!” continued Dr. <i>Slop</i>,—“and may heaven, with all the powers which move therein, rise up against him, curse and damn him” (<i>Obadiah</i>) “unless he repent and make satisfaction! Amen. So be it,—so be it. Amen.”</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
				</table>
				<p>I declare, quoth my uncle <i>Toby</i>, my heart would not let me curse the devil himself with so much bitterness.—He is the father of curses, replied Dr. <i>Slop</i>.——So am not I, replied my uncle.——But he is cursed, and damn’d already, to all eternity, replied Dr. <i>Slop</i>.</p>
				<p>I am sorry for it, quoth my uncle <i>Toby</i>.</p>
				<p>Dr. <i>Slop</i> drew up his mouth, and was just beginning to return my uncle <i>Toby</i> the compliment of his Whu—u—u—or interjectional whistle——when the door hastily opening in the next chapter but one——put an end to the affair.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
