<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 34</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-3" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-3-34" epub:type="chapter">
				<h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXXIV</h2>
<p><span class="firstword">It</span> is a singular blessing, that
nature has form’d the mind of man with the same happy backwardness and
renitency against conviction, which is observed in old dogs—“of
not learning new tricks.”</p>
<p>What a shuttlecock of a fellow would the greatest philosopher that
ever existed be whisk’d into at once, did he read such books, and
observe such facts, and think such thoughts, as would eternally be
making him change sides!</p>
<p>Now, my father, as I told you last year, detested all this—He
pick’d up an opinion, Sir, as a man in a state of nature picks up an
apple.—It becomes his own—and if he is a man of spirit, he
would lose his life rather than give it up.</p>
<p>I am aware that <i>Didius</i>, the great civilian, will contest this
point; and cry out against me, Whence comes this man’s right to this
apple? <i>ex confesso</i>, he will say—things were in a state of
nature—The apple, as much <i>Frank’s</i> apple as <i>John’s</i>.
Pray, Mr. <i>Shandy</i>, what patent has he to shew for it? and how did
it begin to be his? was it, when he set his heart upon it? or when he
gathered it? or when he chew’d it? or when he roasted it? or when he
peel’d, or when he brought it home? or when he digested?—or when
he——?——For ’tis plain, Sir, if the first picking
up of the apple, made it not his—that no subsequent act could.</p>
<p>Brother <i>Didius</i>, <i>Tribonius</i> will answer—(now
<i>Tribonius</i> the civilian and church lawyer’s beard being three
inches and a half and three eighths longer than <i>Didius</i> his
beard—I’m glad he takes up the cudgels for me, so I give myself no
farther trouble about the answer).—Brother <i>Didius</i>,
<i>Tribonius</i> will say, it is a
decreed case, as you may find it in the fragments of <i>Gregorius</i>
and <i>Hermogines’s</i> codes, and in all the codes from
<i>Justinian’s</i> down to the codes of <i>Louis</i> and <i>Des
Eaux</i>—That the sweat of a man’s brows, and the exsudations of a
man’s brains, are as much a man’s own property as the breeches upon his
backside;—which said exsudations, &amp;c., being dropp’d upon the
said apple by the labour of finding it, and picking it up; and being
moreover indissolubly wasted, and as indissolubly annex’d, by the picker
up, to the thing pick’d up, carried home, roasted, peel’d, eaten,
digested, and so on;——’tis evident that the gatherer of the
apple, in so doing, has mix’d up something which was his own, with the
apple which was not his own, by which means he has acquired a
property;—or, in other words, the apple is <i>John’s</i>
apple.</p>
<p>By the same learned chain of reasoning my father stood up for all his
opinions; he had spared no pains in picking them up, and the more they
lay out of the common way, the better still was his
title.——No mortal claimed them; they had cost him moreover
as much labour in cooking and digesting as in the case above, so that
they might well and truly be said to be of his own goods and
chattles.—Accordingly he held fast by ’em, both by teeth and
claws—would fly to whatever he could lay his hands on—and,
in a word, would intrench and fortify them round with as many
circumvallations and breast-works, as my uncle <i>Toby</i> would a
citadel.</p>
<p>There was one plaguy rub in the way of this——the scarcity
of materials to make anything of a defence with, in case of a smart
attack; inasmuch as few men of great genius had exercised their parts in
writing books upon the subject of great noses: by the trotting of my
lean horse, the thing is incredible! and I am quite lost in my
understanding, when I am considering what a treasure of precious time
and talents together has been wasted upon worse subjects—and how
many millions of books in all languages, and in all possible types and
bindings, have been fabricated upon points not half so much tending to
the unity and peace-making of the world. What was to be had, however, he
set the greater store by; and though my father would oft-times sport
with my uncle <i>Toby’s</i> library—which, by the bye, was
ridiculous enough—yet at the very same time he did it, he
collected every book and treatise which had been systematically wrote
upon noses, with as much care as my honest uncle <i>Toby</i> had done
those upon military architecture.——’Tis true, a much
less table would
have held them—but that was not thy transgression, my dear <span class="locked">uncle.—</span></p>
<p>Here——but why here——rather than in any other
part of my story——I am not able to
tell:———but here it is———my heart
stops me to pay to thee, my dear uncle <i>Toby</i>, once for all, the
tribute I owe thy goodness.——Here let me thrust my chair
aside, and kneel down upon the ground, whilst I am pouring forth the
warmest sentiment of love for thee, and veneration for the excellency of
thy character, that ever virtue and nature kindled in a nephew’s
bosom.——Peace and comfort rest for evermore upon thy
head!—Thou enviedst no man’s comforts——insultedst no
man’s opinions——Thou blackenedst no man’s
character—devouredst no man’s bread: gently, with faithful
<i>Trim</i> behind thee, didst thou amble round the little circle of thy
pleasures, jostling no creature in thy way:—for each one’s sorrow
thou hadst a tear,—for each man’s need, thou hadst a shilling.</p>
<p>Whilst I am worth one, to pay a weeder—thy path from thy door
to thy bowling-green shall never be grown up.——Whilst there
is a rood and a half of land in the <i>Shandy</i> family, thy
fortifications, my dear uncle <i>Toby</i>, shall never be
demolish’d.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
