<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 11</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-9" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-9-11" epub:type="chapter">
				<h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XI</h2>
<p>——“<span class="firstword">Now</span> what can their
two noddles be about?” cried my father - - &amp;c.
- - - -</p>
<p>I dare say, said my mother, they are making
fortifications——</p>
<p>———Not on Mrs. <i>Wadman’s</i> premises! cried my
father, stepping <span class="locked">back——</span></p>
<p>I suppose not: quoth my mother.</p>
<p>I wish, said my father, raising his voice, the whole science of
fortification at the devil, with all its trumpery of saps, mines,
blinds, gabions, fausse-brays and <span class="locked">cuvetts———</span></p>
<p>——They are foolish things——said my
mother.</p>
<p>Now she had a way, which, by the bye, I would this moment give away
my purple jerkin, and my yellow slippers into the bargain, if some of
your reverences would imitate—and that was, never to refuse her
assent and consent to any proposition my father laid before her, merely
because she did not understand it, or had no ideas of the principal word
or term of art, upon which the tenet or proposition rolled. She
contented herself with doing all that her godfathers and godmothers
promised for
<span class="pagenum">
<a id="page452" name="page452">452</a></span>
her—but no more; and so would go on using a hard word twenty years
together—and replying to it too, if it was a verb, in all its
moods and tenses, without giving herself any trouble to enquire
about it.</p>
<p>This was an eternal source of misery to my father, and broke the
neck, at the first setting out, of more good dialogues between them,
than could have done the most petulant contradiction——the
few which survived were the better for the <span class="locked"><i>cuvetts</i>——</span></p>
<p>—“They are foolish things;” said my mother.</p>
<p>——Particularly the <i>cuvetts</i>; replied my father.</p>
<p>’Tis enough—he tasted the sweet of triumph—and went
on.</p>
<p>—Not that they are, properly speaking, Mrs. <i>Wadman’s</i>
premises, said my father, partly correcting himself—because she is
but tenant for <span class="locked">life——</span></p>
<p>——That makes a great difference—said my
mother——</p>
<p>—In a fool’s head, replied my father——</p>
<p>Unless she should happen to have a child—said my
mother—</p>
<p>——But she must persuade my brother <i>Toby</i> first to
get her <span class="locked">one—</span></p>
<p>——To be sure, Mr. <i>Shandy</i>, quoth my mother.</p>
<p>——Though if it comes to persuasion—said my
father—Lord have mercy upon them.</p>
<p>Amen: said my mother, <i>piano</i>.</p>
<p>Amen: cried my father, <i>fortissimè</i>.</p>
<p>Amen: said my mother again——but with such a sighing
cadence of personal pity at the end of it, as discomfited every fibre
about my father—he instantly took out his almanack; but before he
could untie it, <i>Yorick’s</i> congregation coming out of church,
became a full answer to one half of his business with it—and my
mother telling him it was a sacrament day—left him as little in
doubt, as to the other part—He put his almanack into his
pocket.</p>
<p>The first Lord of the Treasury thinking of <i>ways and means</i>,
could not have returned home with a more embarrassed look.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
