<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 16</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-8" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-8-16" epub:type="chapter">
				<h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XVI</h2>
				<p>——And so to make sure of both systems, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> <i>Wadman</i> predetermined to light my uncle <i>Toby</i> neither at this end or that; but, like a prodigal’s candle, to light him, if possible, at both ends at once.</p>
				<p>Now, through all the lumber rooms of military furniture, including both of horse and foot, from the great arsenal of <i>Venice</i> to the <i>Tower</i> of <i>London</i> (exclusive), if <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> <i>Wadman</i> had been rummaging for seven years together, and with <i>Bridget</i> to help her, she could not have found any one <i>blind</i> or <i>mantelet</i> so fit for her purpose, as that which the expediency of my uncle <i>Toby’s</i> affairs had fix’d up ready to her hands.</p>
				<p>I believe I have not told you⁠——but I don’t know⁠——possibly I have⁠——be it as it will, ’tis one of the number of those many things, which a man had better do over again, than dispute about it⁠—That whatever town or fortress the corporal was at work upon, during the course of their campaign, my uncle <i>Toby</i> always took care, on the inside of his sentry-box, which was towards his left hand, to have a plan of the place, fasten’d up with two or three pins at the top, but loose at the bottom, for the conveniency of holding it up to the eye, etc … as occasions required; so that when an attack was resolved upon, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> <i>Wadman</i> had nothing more to do, when she had got advanced to the door of the sentry-box, but to extend her right hand; and edging in her left foot at the same movement, to take hold of the map or plan, or upright, or whatever it was, and with out-stretched neck meeting it half way,⁠—to advance it towards her; on which my uncle <i>Toby’s</i> passions were sure to catch fire⁠——for he would instantly take hold of the other corner of the map in his left hand, and with the end of his pipe in the other, begin an explanation.</p>
				<p>When the attack was advanced to this point;⁠——the world will naturally enter into the reasons of <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> <i>Wadman’s</i> next stroke of generalship⁠——which was, to take my uncle <i>Toby’s</i> tobacco-pipe out of his hand as soon as she possibly could; which, under one pretence or other, but generally that of pointing more distinctly at some redoubt or breastwork in the map, she would effect before my uncle <i>Toby</i> (poor soul!) had well march’d above half a dozen toises with it.</p>
				<p>—It obliged my uncle <i>Toby</i> to make use of his forefinger.</p>
				<p>The difference it made in the attack was this; That in going upon it, as in the first case, with the end of her forefinger against the end of my uncle <i>Toby’s</i> tobacco-pipe, she might have travelled with it, along the lines, from <i>Dan</i> to <i>Beersheba</i>, had my uncle <i>Toby’s</i> lines reach’d so far, without any effect: For as there was no arterial or vital heat in the end of the tobacco-pipe, it could excite no sentiment⁠——it could neither give fire by pulsation⁠——or receive it by sympathy⁠——’twas nothing but smoke.</p>
				<p>Whereas, in following my uncle <i>Toby’s</i> forefinger with hers, close thro’ all the little turns and indentings of his works⁠—pressing sometimes against the side of it⁠——then treading upon its nail⁠——then tripping it up⁠——then touching it here⁠——then there, and so on⁠——it set something at least in motion.</p>
				<p>This, tho’ slight skirmishing, and at a distance from the main body, yet drew on the rest; for here, the map usually falling with the back of it, close to the side of the sentry-box, my uncle <i>Toby</i>, in the simplicity of his soul, would lay his hand flat upon it, in order to go on with his explanation; and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> <i>Wadman</i>, by a manœuvre as quick as thought, would as certainly place her’s close beside it; this at once opened a communication, large enough for any sentiment to pass or repass, which a person skill’d in the elementary and practical part of love-making, has occasion for⁠——</p>
				<p>By bringing up her forefinger parallel (as before) to my uncle <i>Toby’s</i>⁠——it unavoidably brought the thumb into action⁠——and the forefinger and thumb being once engaged, as naturally brought in the whole hand. Thine, dear uncle <i>Toby!</i> was never now in its right place⁠——<abbr>Mrs.</abbr> <i>Wadman</i> had it ever to take up, or, with the gentlest pushings, protrusions, and equivocal compressions, that a hand to be removed is capable of receiving⁠——to get it press’d a hair breadth of one side out of her way.</p>
				<p>Whilst this was doing, how could she forget to make him sensible, that it was her leg (and no one’s else) at the bottom of the sentry-box, which slightly press’d against the calf of his⁠——So that my uncle <i>Toby</i> being thus attacked and sore push’d on both his wings⁠——was it a wonder, if now and then, it put his centre into disorder?⁠——</p>
				<p>——The duce take it! said my uncle <i>Toby</i>.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
