<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>III</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-8" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-8-3" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</h3>
				<p>⸺⁠Bonjour!⁠⸺⁠good morrow!⁠⸺⁠so you have got your cloak on betimes!⁠⸺⁠but ’tis a cold morning, and you judge the matter rightly⁠⸺’tis better to be well mounted, than go o’ foot⁠⸺⁠and obstructions in the glands are dangerous⁠⸺⁠And how goes it with thy concubine⁠—thy wife,⁠—and thy little ones o’ both sides? and when did you hear from the old gentleman and lady⁠—your sister, aunt, uncle, and cousins⁠⸺⁠I hope they have got better of their colds, coughs, claps, toothaches, fevers, stranguries, sciaticas, swellings, and sore eyes.</p>
				<p>⸺⁠What a devil of an apothecary! to take so much blood⁠—give such a vile purge⁠—puke⁠—poultice⁠—plaister⁠—night-draught⁠—clyster⁠—blister?⁠⸺⁠And why so many grains of calomel? santa Maria! and such a dose of opium! periclitating, pardi! the whole family of ye, from head to tail⁠⸺⁠By my great-aunt <i>Dinah’s</i> old black velvet mask! I think there was no occasion for it.</p>
				<p>Now this being a little bald about the chin, by frequently putting off and on, <em>before</em> she was got with child by the coachman⁠—not one of our family would wear it after. To cover the <strong>mask</strong> afresh, was more than the mask was worth⁠⸺⁠and to wear a mask which was bald, or which could be half seen through, was as bad as having no mask at all⁠⸺⁠</p>
				<p>This is the reason, may it please your reverences, that in all our numerous family, for these four generations, we count no more than one archbishop, a <i>Welch</i> judge, some three or four aldermen, and a single mountebank⁠⸺⁠</p>
				<p>In the sixteenth century, we boast of no less than a dozen alchymists.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
