<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 36</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-7" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-7-36" epub:type="chapter">
				<h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXXVI</h2>
<p><span class="firstword">Though</span> I was sensible I had said as
many clever things to the commissary as came to six livres four sous,
yet I was determined to note down the imposition amongst my remarks
before I retired
<span class="pagenum">
<a id="page387" name="page387">387</a></span>
from the place; so putting my hand into my coat-pocket for my
remarks—(which, by the bye, may be a caution to travellers to take
a little more care of <i>their</i> remarks for the future) “my remarks
were <i>stolen</i>”——Never did sorry traveller make such a
pother and racket about his remarks as I did about mine, upon the
occasion.</p>
<p>Heaven! earth! sea! fire! cried I, calling in everything to my aid
but what I should———My remarks are stolen!—what
shall I do?——Mr. Commissary! pray did I drop any remarks, as
I stood besides <span class="locked">you?———</span></p>
<p>You dropp’d a good many very singular ones; replied
he——Pugh! said I, those were but a few, not worth above six
livres two sous—but these are a large parcel——He shook
his head——Monsieur <i>Le Blanc!</i> Madam <i>Le Blanc!</i>
did you see any papers of mine?—you maid of the house! run up
stairs—<i>François!</i> run up after <span class="locked">her——</span></p>
<p>—I must have my remarks——they were the best
remarks, cried I, that ever were made—the wisest—the
wittiest—What shall I do?—which way shall I turn myself?</p>
<p><i>Sancho Pança</i>, when he lost his ass’s <span class="smallroman">FURNITURE</span>, did not exclaim more bitterly.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
