<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 8</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-4" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-4-8" epub:type="chapter">
				<h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">VIII</h2>
				<p>Though man is of all others the most curious vehicle, said my father, yet at the same time ’tis of so slight a frame, and so totteringly put together, that the sudden jerks and hard jostlings it unavoidably meets with in this rugged journey, would overset and tear it to pieces a dozen times a day⁠⸺⁠was it not, brother <i>Toby</i>, that there is a secret spring within us.⁠—Which spring, said my uncle <i>Toby</i>, I take to be Religion.⁠—Will that set my child’s nose on? cried my father, letting go his finger, and striking one hand against the other.⁠⸺⁠It makes everything straight for us, answered my uncle <i>Toby</i>.⁠⸺⁠Figuratively speaking, dear <i>Toby</i>, it may, for aught I know, said my father; but the spring I am speaking of, is that great and elastic power within us of counterbalancing evil, which, like a secret spring in a well-ordered machine, though it can’t prevent the shock⁠⸺⁠at least it imposes upon our sense of it.</p>
				<p>Now, my dear brother, said my father, replacing his forefinger, as he was coming closer to the point⁠⸺⁠had my child arrived safe into the world, unmartyr’d in that precious part of him⁠—fanciful and extravagant as I may appear to the world in my opinion of christian names, and of that magic bias which good or bad names irresistibly impress upon our characters and conducts⁠—Heaven is witness! that in the warmest transports of my wishes for the prosperity of my child, I never once wished to crown his head with more glory and honour than what <b>George</b> or <b>Edward</b> would have spread around it.</p>
				<p>But alas! continued my father, as the greatest evil has befallen him⁠⸺⁠I must counteract and undo it with the greatest good.</p>
				<p>He shall be christened <i>Trismegistus</i>, brother.</p>
				<p>I wish it may answer⁠⸺⁠replied my uncle <i>Toby</i>, rising up.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
