<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 25</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-1" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-1-25" epub:type="chapter">
				<h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXV</h2>
				<p>The wound in my uncle <i>Toby’s</i> groin, which he received at the siege of <i>Namur</i>, rendering him unfit for the service, it was thought expedient he should return to <i>England</i>, in order, if possible, to be set to rights.</p>
				<p>He was four years totally confined,—part of it to his bed, and all of it to his room: and in the course of his cure, which was all that time in hand, suffer’d unspeakable miseries,—owing to a succession of exfoliations from the <i>os pubis</i>, and the outward edge of that part of the <i>coxendix</i> called the <i>os illium</i>,——both which bones were dismally crush’d, as much by the irregularity of the stone, which I told you was broke off the parapet,—as by its size,—(tho’ it was pretty large) which inclined the surgeon all along to think, that the great injury which it had done my uncle <i>Toby’s</i> groin, was more owing to the gravity of the stone itself, than to the projectile force of it,—which he would often tell him was a great happiness.</p>
				<p>My father at that time was just beginning business in <i>London</i>, and had taken a house;—and as the truest friendship and cordiality subsisted between the two brothers,—and that my father thought my uncle <i>Toby</i> could no where be so well nursed and taken care of as in his own house,——he assign’d him the very best apartment in it.—And what was a much more sincere mark of his affection still, he would never suffer a friend or an acquaintance to step into the house on any occasion, but he would take him by the hand, and lead him up stairs to see his brother <i>Toby</i>, and chat an hour by his bedside.</p>
				<p>The history of a soldier’s wound beguiles the pain of it;—my uncle’s visitors at least thought so, and in their daily calls upon him, from the courtesy arising out of that belief, they would frequently turn the discourse to that subject,—and from that subject the discourse would generally roll on to the siege itself.</p>
				<p>These conversations were infinitely kind; and my uncle <i>Toby</i> received great relief from them, and would have received much more, but that they brought him into some unforeseen perplexities, which, for three months together, retarded his cure greatly; and if he had not hit upon an expedient to extricate himself out of them, I verily believe they would have laid him in his grave.</p>
				<p>What these perplexities of my uncle <i>Toby</i> were,——’tis impossible for you to guess;—if you could,—I should blush; not as a relation,—not as a man,—nor even as a woman,—but I should blush as an author; inasmuch as I set no small store by myself upon this very account, that my reader has never yet been able to guess at anything. And in this, Sir, I am of so nice and singular a humour, that if I thought you was able to form the least judgment or probable conjecture to yourself, of what was to come in the next page,—I would tear it out of my book.</p>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a href="#tag_1_1" id="note_1_1" name="note_1_1">1.</a> The <i>Romish</i> Rituals direct the baptizing of the child, in cases of danger, <i>before</i> it is born;—but upon this proviso, That some part or other of the child’s body be seen by the baptizer:——But the Doctors of the <i>Sorbonne</i>, by a deliberation held amongst them, <i>April</i> 10, 1733,—have enlarged the powers of the midwives, by determining, That though no part of the child’s body should appear,——that baptism shall, nevertheless, be administered to it by injection,—<i>par le moyen d’une petite canulle</i>,—Anglicè <i>a squirt</i>.——’Tis very strange that St. <i>Thomas Aquinas</i>, who had so good a mechanical head, both for tying and untying the knots of school-divinity,—should, after so much pains bestowed upon this,—give up the point at last, as a second <i>La chose impossible</i>,—“Infantes in maternis uteris existentes (quoth <ins class="correction" title=". missing">St.</ins> <i>Thomas!</i>) baptizari possunt <i>nullo modo</i>.”—O <i>Thomas! Thomas!</i></p>
					<p>If the reader has the curiosity to see the question upon baptism <i>by injection</i>, as presented to the Doctors of the <i>Sorbonne</i>, with their consultation thereupon, it is as follows.</p>
					<p><a href="#tag_1_2" id="note_1_2" name="note_1_2">2.</a> Vide Deventer, Paris edit., 4to, 1734, p. 366.</p>
					<p><a href="#tag_1_3" id="note_1_3" name="note_1_3">3.</a><ins class="correction" title="text unchanged: expected form is ‘pantagraph’">Pentagraph</ins>, an instrument to copy Prints and Pictures mechanically, and in any proportion.</p>
				</div>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
