<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 5</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-9" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-9-5" epub:type="chapter">
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</h2>
				<p>As <i>Tom’s</i> place, an’ please your honour, was easy⁠—and the weather warm⁠—it put him upon thinking seriously of settling himself in the world; and as it fell out about that time, that a <i>Jew</i> who kept a sausage shop in the same street, had the ill luck to die of a strangury, and leave his widow in possession of a rousing trade⁠⸺⁠<i>Tom</i> thought (as everybody in <i>Lisbon</i> was doing the best he could devise for himself) there could be no harm in offering her his service to carry it on: so without any introduction to the widow, except that of buying a pound of sausages at her shop⁠—<i>Tom</i> set out⁠—counting the matter thus within himself, as he walk’d along; that let the worst come of it that could, he should at least get a pound of sausages for their worth⁠—but, if things went well, he should be set up; inasmuch as he should get not only a pound of sausages⁠—but a wife and⁠—a sausage shop, an’ please your honour, into the bargain.</p>
				<p>Every servant in the family, from high to low, wish’d <i>Tom</i> success; and I can fancy, an’ please your honour, I see him this moment with his white dimity waistcoat and breeches, and hat a little o’ one side, passing jollily along the street, swinging his stick, with a smile and a chearful word for everybody he met:⁠⸺⁠But alas! <i>Tom!</i> thou smilest no more, cried the corporal, looking on one side of him upon the ground, as if he apostrophised him in his dungeon.</p>
				<p>Poor fellow! said my uncle <i>Toby</i>, feelingly.</p>
				<p>He was an honest, lighthearted lad, an’ please your honour, as ever blood warm’d⁠⸺⁠</p>
				<p>⸺⁠Then he resembled thee, <i>Trim</i>, said my uncle <i>Toby</i>, rapidly.</p>
				<p>The corporal blush’d down to his fingers ends⁠—a tear of sentimental bashfulness⁠—another of gratitude to my uncle <i>Toby</i>⁠—and a tear of sorrow for his brother’s misfortunes, started into his eye, and ran sweetly down his cheek together; my uncle <i>Toby’s</i> kindled as one lamp does at another; and taking hold of the breast of <i>Trim’s</i> coat (which had been that of <i>Le Fever’s</i>) as if to ease his lame leg, but in reality to gratify a finer feeling⁠⸺⁠he stood silent for a minute and a half; at the end of which he took his hand away, and the corporal making a bow, went on with his story of his brother and the <i>Jew’s</i> widow.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
