<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 20</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-8" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-8-20" epub:type="chapter">
				<h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XX</h2>
<p><span class="firstword">The</span> anguish of my knee, continued
the corporal, was excessive in itself; and the uneasiness of the cart,
with the roughness of the roads, which were terribly cut up—making
bad still worse—every step was death to me: so that with the loss
of blood, and the want of care-taking of me, and a fever I felt coming
on besides——(Poor soul! said my uncle
<i>Toby</i>)——all together, an’ please your honour, was more
than I could sustain.</p>
<p>I was telling my sufferings to a young woman at a peasant’s house,
where our cart, which was the last of the line, had halted; they had
help’d me in, and the young woman had taken a cordial out of her pocket
and dropp’d it upon some sugar, and seeing it had cheer’d me, she had
given it me a second and a third time——So I was telling her,
an’ please your honour, the anguish I was in, and was saying it was so
intolerable to me, that I had much rather lie down upon the bed, turning
my face towards one which was in the corner of the room—and die,
than go on——when, upon her attempting to lead me to it,
I fainted away in her arms. She was a good soul! as your honour,
said the corporal, wiping his eyes, will hear.</p>
<p>I thought <i>love</i> had been a joyous thing, quoth my uncle
<i>Toby</i>.</p>
<p>’Tis the most serious thing, an’ please your honour (sometimes), that
is in the world.</p>
<p>By the persuasion of the young woman, continued the corporal, the
cart with the wounded men set off without me: she had assured them I
should expire immediately if I was put into the cart. So when I came to
myself——I found myself in a still quiet cottage, with
no one but the young woman, and the peasant and his wife. I was
laid across the bed in the corner of the room, with my wounded leg upon
a chair, and the young woman beside me, holding the corner of her
handkerchief dipp’d in vinegar to my nose with one hand, and rubbing my
temples with the other.</p>
<p>I took her at first for the daughter of the peasant (for it was no
inn)—so had offer’d her a little purse with eighteen florins,
which my poor brother <i>Tom</i> (here <i>Trim</i> wip’d his eyes) had
sent me as a token, by a recruit, just before he set out for <span class="locked"><i>Lisbon</i>.——</span></p>
<span class="pagenum">
<a id="page420" name="page420">420</a></span>
<p>——I never told your honour that piteous story
yet——here <i>Trim</i> wiped his eyes a third time.</p>
<p>The young woman call’d the old man and his wife into the room, to
show them the money, in order to gain me credit for a bed and what
little necessaries I should want, till I should be in a condition to be
got to the hospital——Come then! said she, tying up the
little purse—I’ll be your banker—but as that office alone
will not keep me employ’d, I’ll be your nurse too.</p>
<p>I thought by her manner of speaking this, as well as by her dress,
which I then began to consider more attentively——that the
young woman could not be the daughter of the peasant.</p>
<p>She was in black down to her toes, with her hair conceal’d under a
cambric border, laid close to her forehead: she was one of those kind of
nuns, an’ please your honour, of which, your honour knows, there are a
good many in <i>Flanders</i>, which they let go loose——By
thy description, <i>Trim</i>, said my uncle <i>Toby</i>, I dare say
she was a young <i>Beguine</i>, of which there are none to be found
anywhere but in the <i>Spanish Netherlands</i>—except at
<i>Amsterdam</i>——they differ from nuns in this, that they
can quit their cloister if they choose to marry; they visit and take
care of the sick by profession——I had rather, for my
own part, they did it out of good-nature.</p>
<p>——She often told me, quoth <i>Trim</i>, she did it for
the love of Christ—I did not like
it.——I believe, <i>Trim</i>, we are both wrong, said my
uncle <i>Toby</i>—we’ll ask Mr. <i>Yorick</i> about it to-night at
my brother <i>Shandy’s</i>——so put me in mind; added my
uncle <i>Toby</i>.</p>
<p>The young <i>Beguine</i>, continued the corporal, had scarce given
herself time to tell me “she would be my nurse,” when she hastily turned
about to begin the office of one, and prepare something for
me——and in a short time—though I thought it a long
one—she came back with flannels, &amp;c. &amp;c., and having
fomented my knee soundly for a couple of hours, &amp;c., and made me a
thin bason of gruel for my supper—she wish’d me rest, and promised
to be with me early in the morning.——She wished me, an’
please your honour, what was not to be had. My fever ran very high that
night—her figure made sad disturbance within me—I was
every moment cutting the world in two—to give her half of
it—and every moment was I crying, That I had nothing but a
knapsack and eighteen florins to share with her——The whole
night long was the fair <i>Beguine</i>, like an angel, close by my
bedside, holding back the curtain and offering me cordials—and I
was only awakened from my dream by her
<span class="pagenum">
<a id="page421" name="page421">421</a></span>
coming there at the hour promised, and giving them in reality. In truth,
she was scarce ever from me; and so accustomed was I to receive life
from her hands, that my heart sickened, and I lost colour when she left
the room: and yet, continued the corporal (making one of the strangest
reflections upon it in the <span class="locked">world)——</span></p>
<p>——“<i>It was not love</i>”——for during the
three weeks she was almost constantly with me, fomenting my knee with
her hand, night and day—I can honestly say, an’ please your
honour—that<span id="yourhonour"></span>
<script type="text/javascript">
  asterisks("yourhonour",1.6,1);
</script>
<noscript>
<span class="space35">* * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * </span>*
 
</noscript>
once.<!-- </p> -->
<p>That was very odd, <i>Trim</i>, quoth my uncle <i>Toby</i>.</p>
<p>I think so too—said Mrs. <i>Wadman</i>.</p>
<p>It never did, said the corporal.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
