<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 24</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-8" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-8-24" epub:type="chapter">
				<h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXIV</h2>
				<p>——I am half distracted, captain <i>Shandy</i>, said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> <i>Wadman</i>, holding up her cambrick handkerchief to her left eye, as she approach’d the door of my uncle <i>Toby’s</i> sentry-box⁠——a mote⁠——or sand⁠——or something⁠——I know not what, has got into this eye of mine⁠——do look into it⁠—it is not in the white⁠—</p>
				<p>In saying which, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> <i>Wadman</i> edged herself close in beside my uncle <i>Toby</i>, and squeezing herself down upon the corner of his bench, she gave him an opportunity of doing it without rising up⁠——Do look into it⁠—said she.</p>
				<p>Honest soul! thou didst look into it with as much innocency of heart, as ever child look’d into a raree-shew-box; and ’twere as much a sin to have hurt thee.</p>
				<p>——If a man will be peeping of his own accord into things of that nature⁠——I’ve nothing to say to it⁠——</p>
				<p>My uncle <i>Toby</i> never did: and I will answer for him, that he would have sat quietly upon a sofa from <i>June</i> to <i>January</i> (which, you know, takes in both the hot and cold months), with an eye as fine as the <i>Thracian</i><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-41" id="noteref-41" epub:type="noteref">41</a> <i>Rodope’s</i> beside him, without being able to tell, whether it was a black or blue one.</p>
				<p>The difficulty was to get my uncle <i>Toby</i> to look at one at all.</p>
				<p>’Tis surmounted. And</p>
				<p>I see him yonder with his pipe pendulous in his hand, and the ashes falling out of it⁠—looking⁠—and looking⁠—then rubbing his eyes⁠—and looking again, with twice the good-nature that ever <i>Gallileo</i> look’d for a spot in the sun.</p>
				<p>——In vain! for by all the powers which animate the organ⁠——Widow <i>Wadman’s</i> left eye shines this moment as lucid as her right⁠——there is neither mote, or sand, or dust, or chaff, or speck, or particle of opake matter floating in it⁠—There is nothing, my dear paternal uncle! but one lambent delicious fire, furtively shooting out from every part of it, in all directions, into thine⁠——</p>
				<p>——If thou lookest, uncle <i>Toby</i>, in search of this mote one moment longer⁠——thou art undone.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
