<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title epub:type="z3998:roman">XX</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-9" id="chapter-9-20" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XX</h3>
			<p>⸻<span>*</span> <span>*</span> <span>*</span> <span>*</span> <span>*</span> <span>*</span> <span>*</span> <span>*</span> <span>*</span> <span>*</span> <span>*</span> <span>*</span> <span>*</span> <span>*</span> <span>*</span> <span>*</span> <span>*</span> <span>*</span> <span>*</span> <span>*</span></p>
			<p><span>*</span> <span>*</span> <span>*</span> <span>*</span> <span>*</span> <span>*</span> <span>*</span> <span>*</span> <span>*</span> <span>*</span> <span>*</span> <span>*</span> <span>*</span> <span>*</span> <span>*</span> <span>*</span> <span>*</span> <span>*</span> <span>*</span> <span>*</span>⁠⸻</p>
			<p>⸺⁠You shall see the very place, Madam; said my uncle <i>Toby</i>.</p>
			<p><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> <i>Wadman</i> blush’d⁠⸺⁠look’d towards the door⁠⸺⁠turn’d pale⁠⸺⁠blush’d slightly again⁠⸺⁠recover’d her natural colour⁠⸺⁠blush’d worse than ever; which, for the sake of the unlearned reader, I translate thus⁠⸺⁠</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span>“L⁠⸺⁠d! I cannot look at it⁠⸺⁠</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What would the world say if I look’d at it?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I should drop down, if I look’d at it⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I wish I could look at it⁠⸺⁠</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There can be no sin in looking at it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>⸺⁠I will look at it.”</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>Whilst all this was running through <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> <i>Wadman’s</i> imagination, my uncle <i>Toby</i> had risen from the sopha, and got to the other side of the parlour door, to give <i>Trim</i> an order about it in the passage⁠⸺⁠</p>
			<p><span>*</span> <span>*</span> <span>*</span> <span>*</span> <span>*</span> <span>*</span> <span>*</span> <span>*</span> <span>*</span> <span>*</span> <span>*</span>⁠⸺⁠I believe it is in the garret, said my uncle <i>Toby</i>⁠⸺⁠I saw it there, an’ please your honour, this morning, answered <i>Trim</i>⁠⸺⁠Then prithee, step directly for it, <i>Trim</i>, said my uncle <i>Toby</i>, and bring it into the parlour.</p>
			<p>The corporal did not approve of the orders, but most chearfully obeyed them. The first was not an act of his will⁠—the second was; so he put on his <i>Montero</i>-cap, and went as fast as his lame knee would let him. My uncle <i>Toby</i> returned into the parlour, and sat himself down again upon the sopha.</p>
			<p>⸺⁠You shall lay your finger upon the place⁠—said my uncle <i>Toby</i>.⁠⸺⁠I will not touch it, however, quoth <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> <i>Wadman</i> to herself.</p>
			<p>This requires a second translation:⁠—it shows what little knowledge is got by mere words⁠—we must go up to the first springs.</p>
			<p>Now in order to clear up the mist which hangs upon these three pages, I must endeavour to be as clear as possible myself.</p>
			<p>Rub your hands thrice across your foreheads⁠—blow your noses⁠—cleanse your emunctories⁠—sneeze, my good people!⁠⸺⁠God bless you⁠⸺⁠</p>
			<p>Now give me all the help you can.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
