<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 7</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-3" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-3-7" epub:type="chapter">
				<h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">VII</h2>
				<p><span class="firstword">Whilst</span> my uncle <i>Toby</i> was whistling <i>Lillabullero</i> to my father,—Dr. <i>Slop</i> was stamping, and cursing and damning at <i>Obadiah</i> at a most dreadful rate,———it would have done your heart good, and cured you, Sir, for ever of the vile sin of swearing, to have heard him; I am determined therefore to relate the whole affair to you.</p>
				<p>When Dr. <i>Slop’s</i> maid delivered the green bays bag with her master’s instruments in it, to <i>Obadiah</i>, she very sensibly exhorted him to put his head and one arm through the strings, and ride with it slung across his body: so undoing the bow-knot, to lengthen the strings for him, without any more ado, she helped him on with it. However, as this, in some measure, unguarded the mouth of the bag, lest anything should bolt out in galloping back, at the speed <i>Obadiah</i> threatened, they consulted to take it off again: and in the great care and caution of their hearts, they had taken the two strings and tied them close (pursing up the mouth of the bag first) with half a dozen hard knots, each of which <i>Obadiah</i>, to make all safe, had twitched and drawn together with all the strength of his body.</p>
				<p>This answered all that <i>Obadiah</i> and the maid intended; but was no remedy against some evils which neither he or she foresaw. The instruments, it seems, as tight as the bag was tied above, had so much room to play in it, towards the bottom (the shape of the bag being conical) that <i>Obadiah</i> could not make a trot of it, but with such a terrible jingle, what with the <i>tire tête</i>, <i>forceps</i>, and <i>squirt</i>, as would have been enough, had <i>Hymen</i> been taking a jaunt that way, to have frightened him out of the country; but when <i>Obadiah</i> accelerated his motion, and from a plain trot assayed to prick his coach-horse into a full gallop——by Heaven! Sir, the jingle was incredible.</p>
				<p>As <i>Obadiah</i> had a wife and three children——the turpitude of fornication, and the many other political ill consequences of this jingling, never once entered his brain,——he had however his objection, which came home to himself, and weighed with him, as it has oft-times done with the greatest patriots.——“<i>The poor fellow, Sir, was not able to hear himself whistle.</i>”</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
