<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 24</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-6" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-6-24" epub:type="chapter">
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIV</h2>
				<p>With two or three other trinkets, small in themselves, but of great regard, which poor <i>Tom</i>, the corporal’s unfortunate brother, had sent him over, with the account of his marriage with the <i>Jew’s</i> widow⁠⸺⁠there was</p>
				<p>A <i>Montero</i>-cap and two <i>Turkish</i> tobacco-pipes.</p>
				<p>The <i>Montero</i>-cap I shall describe by and bye.⁠⸺⁠The <i>Turkish</i> tobacco-pipes had nothing particular in them, they were fitted up and ornamented as usual, with flexible tubes of <i>Morocco</i> leather and gold wire, and mounted at their ends, the one of them with ivory,⁠—the other with black ebony, tipp’d with silver.</p>
				<p>My father, who saw all things in lights different from the rest of the world, would say to the corporal, that he ought to look upon these two presents more as tokens of his brother’s nicety, than his affection.⁠⸺⁠<i>Tom</i> did not care, <i>Trim</i>, he would say, to put on the cap, or to smoke in the tobacco-pipe of a <i>Jew</i>.⁠⸺⁠God bless your honour, the corporal would say, (giving a strong reason to the contrary)⁠—how can that be?</p>
				<p>The Montero-cap was scarlet, of a superfine <i>Spanish</i> cloth, dyed in grain, and mounted all round with fur, except about four inches in the front, which was faced with a light blue, slightly embroidered,⁠—and seemed to have been the property of a <i>Portuguese</i> quartermaster, not of foot, but of horse, as the word denotes.</p>
				<p>The corporal was not a little proud of it, as well for its own sake, as the sake of the giver, so seldom or never put it on but upon <b>Gala</b>-days; and yet never was a Montero-cap put to so many uses; for in all controverted points, whether military or culinary, provided the corporal was sure he was in the right,⁠—it was either his <em>oath</em>,⁠—his <em>wager</em>,⁠—or his <em>gift</em>.</p>
				<p>⸺’Twas his gift in the present case.</p>
				<p>I’ll be bound, said the corporal, speaking to himself, to <em>give</em> away my Montero-cap to the first beggar who comes to the door, if I do not manage this matter to his honour’s satisfaction.</p>
				<p>The completion was no further off than the very next morning; which was that of the storm of the counterscarp betwixt the <i>Lower Deule</i>, to the right, and the gate <i><abbr>St.</abbr> Andrew</i>,⁠—and on the left, between <abbr>St.</abbr> <i>Magdalen’s</i> and the river.</p>
				<p>As this was the most memorable attack in the whole war,⁠—the most gallant and obstinate on both sides,⁠—and I must add the most bloody too, for it cost the allies themselves that morning above eleven hundred men,⁠—my uncle <i>Toby</i> prepared himself for it with a more than ordinary solemnity.</p>
				<p>The eve which preceded, as my uncle <i>Toby</i> went to bed, he ordered his ramallie wig, which had laid inside out for many years in the corner of an old compaigning trunk, which stood by his bedside, to be taken out and laid upon the lid of it, ready for the morning;⁠—and the very first thing he did in his shirt, when he had stepped out of bed, my uncle <i>Toby</i>, after he had turned the rough side outwards,⁠—put it on:⁠⸺⁠This done, he proceeded next to his breeches, and having buttoned the waistband, he forthwith buckled on his sword-belt, and had got his sword half way in,⁠—when he considered he should want shaving, and that it would be very inconvenient doing it with his sword on,⁠—so took it off:⁠⸺⁠In assaying to put on his regimental coat and waistcoat, my uncle <i>Toby</i> found the same objection in his wig,⁠—so that went off too:⁠—So that what with one thing and what with another, as always falls out when a man is in the most haste,⁠—’twas ten o’clock, which was half an hour later than his usual time, before my uncle <i>Toby</i> sallied out.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
