<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 16</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-9" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-9-16" epub:type="chapter">
				<h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XVI</h2>
				<p>When my uncle <i>Toby</i> and the corporal had marched down to the bottom of the avenue, they recollected their business lay the other way; so they faced about and marched up straight to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> <i>Wadman’s</i> door.</p>
				<p>I warrant your honour; said the corporal, touching his <i>Montero</i>-cap with his hand, as he passed him in order to give a knock at the door⁠——My uncle <i>Toby</i>, contrary to his invariable way of treating his faithful servant, said nothing good or bad: the truth was, he had not altogether marshal’d his ideas; he wish’d for another conference, and as the corporal was mounting up the three steps before the door⁠—he hem’d twice⁠—a portion of my uncle <i>Toby’s</i> most modest spirits fled, at each expulsion, towards the corporal; he stood with the rapper of the door suspended for a full minute in his hand, he scarce knew why. <i>Bridget</i> stood perdue within, with her finger and her thumb upon the latch, benumb’d with expectation; and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> <i>Wadman</i>, with an eye ready to be deflowered again, sat breathless behind the window-curtain of her bedchamber, watching their approach.</p>
				<p><i>Trim!</i> said my uncle <i>Toby</i>⁠——but as he articulated the word, the minute expired, and <i>Trim</i> let fall the rapper.</p>
				<p>My uncle <i>Toby</i> perceiving that all hopes of a conference were knock’d on the head by it⁠———whistled Lillabullero.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
