<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 28</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-5" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-5-28" epub:type="chapter">
				<h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXVIII</h2>
				<p>Dear <i>Yorick</i>, said my father, smiling (for <i>Yorick</i> had broke his rank with my uncle <i>Toby</i> in coming through the narrow entry, and so had stepped first into the parlour)⁠—this <i>Tristram</i> of ours, I find, comes very hardly by all his religious rites.⁠—Never was the son of <i>Jew</i>, <i>Christian</i>, <i>Turk</i>, or <i>Infidel</i> initiated into them in so oblique and slovenly a manner.⁠—But he is no worse, I trust, said <i>Yorick</i>.⁠—There has been certainly, continued my father, the deuce and all to do in some part or other of the ecliptic, when this offspring of mine was formed.⁠—That, you are a better judge of than I, replied <i>Yorick</i>.⁠—Astrologers, quoth my father, know better than us both:⁠—the trine and sextil aspects have jumped awry,⁠—or the opposite of their ascendants have not hit it, as they should,⁠—or the lords of the genitures (as they call them) have been at <em>bo-peep</em>,⁠—or something has been wrong above, or below with us.</p>
				<p>’Tis possible, answered <i>Yorick</i>.⁠—But is the child, cried my uncle <i>Toby</i>, the worse?⁠—The <i>Troglodytes</i> say not, replied my father. And your theologists, <i>Yorick</i>, tell us⁠—Theologically? said <i>Yorick</i>,⁠—or speaking after the manner of apothecaries?<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-26" id="noteref-26" epub:type="noteref">26</a>⁠—statesmen?<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-27" id="noteref-27" epub:type="noteref">27</a>⁠—or washerwomen?<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-28" id="noteref-28" epub:type="noteref">28</a></p>
				<p>⸺⁠I’m not sure, replied my father,⁠—but they tell us, brother <i>Toby</i>, he’s the better for it.⁠⸺⁠Provided, said <i>Yorick</i>, you travel him into <i>Egypt</i>.⁠⸺⁠Of that, answered my father, he will have the advantage, when he sees the <i>Pyramids</i>.⁠⸺⁠</p>
				<p>Now every word of this, quoth my uncle <i>Toby</i>, is <i>Arabick</i> to me.⁠⸺⁠I wish, said <i>Yorick</i>, ’twas so, to half the world.</p>
				<p>⸺⁠<b>Ilus</b>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-29" id="noteref-29" epub:type="noteref">29</a> continued my father, circumcised his whole army one morning.⁠—Not without a court martial? cried my uncle <i>Toby</i>.⁠⸺⁠Though the learned, continued he, taking no notice of my uncle <i>Toby’s</i> remark, but turning to <i>Yorick</i>,⁠—are greatly divided still who <i>Ilus</i> was;⁠—some say <i>Saturn</i>;⁠—some the Supreme Being;⁠—others, no more than a brigadier general under <i>Pharaoh-neco</i>.⁠⸺⁠Let him be who he will, said my uncle <i>Toby</i>, I know not by what article of war he could justify it.</p>
				<p>The controvertists, answered my father, assign two-and-twenty different reasons for it:⁠—others, indeed, who have drawn their pens on the opposite side of the question, have shown the world the futility of the greatest part of them.⁠—But then again, our best polemic divines⁠—I wish there was not a polemic divine, said <i>Yorick</i>, in the kingdom;⁠—one ounce of practical divinity⁠—is worth a painted shipload of all their reverences have imported these fifty years.⁠—Pray, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <i>Yorick</i>, quoth my uncle <i>Toby</i>,⁠—do tell me what a polemic divine is?⁠⸺⁠The best description, captain <i>Shandy</i>, I have ever read, is of a couple of ’em, replied <i>Yorick</i>, in the account of the battle fought single hands betwixt <i>Gymnast</i> and captain <i>Tripet</i>; which I have in my pocket.⁠⸺⁠I beg I may hear it, quoth my uncle <i>Toby</i> earnestly.⁠—You shall, said <i>Yorick</i>.⁠—And as the corporal is waiting for me at the door,⁠—and I know the description of a battle will do the poor fellow more good than his supper,⁠—I beg, brother, you’ll give him leave to come in.⁠—With all my soul, said my father.⁠⸺⁠<i>Trim</i> came in, erect and happy as an emperor; and having shut the door, <i>Yorick</i> took a book from his right-hand coat-pocket, and read, or pretended to read, as follows.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
