<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>II</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-5" id="chapter-5-2" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</h3>
			<p>When my father received the letter which brought him the melancholy account of my brother <i>Bobby’s</i> death, he was busy calculating the expense of his riding post from <i>Calais</i> to <i>Paris</i>, and so on to <i>Lyons</i>.</p>
			<p>’Twas a most inauspicious journey; my father having had every foot of it to travel over again, and his calculation to begin afresh, when he had almost got to the end of it, by <i>Obadiah’s</i> opening the door to acquaint him the family was out of yeast⁠—and to ask whether he might not take the great coach-horse early in the morning and ride in search of some.⁠—With all my heart, <i>Obadiah</i>, said my father (pursuing his journey)⁠—take the coach-horse, and welcome.⁠⸺⁠But he wants a shoe, poor creature! said <i>Obadiah</i>.⁠⸺⁠Poor creature! said my uncle <i>Toby</i>, vibrating the note back again, like a string in unison. Then ride the <i>Scotch</i> horse, quoth my father hastily.⁠—He cannot bear a saddle upon his back, quoth <i>Obadiah</i>, for the whole world.⁠⸺⁠The devil’s in that horse; then take <b>Patriot</b>, cried my father, and shut the door.⁠⸺⁠<b>Patriot</b> is sold, said <i>Obadiah</i>. Here’s for you! cried my father, making a pause, and looking in my uncle <i>Toby’s</i> face, as if the thing had not been a matter of fact.⁠—Your worship ordered me to sell him last <i>April</i>, said <i>Obadiah</i>.⁠—Then go on foot for your pains, cried my father⁠⸺⁠I had much rather walk than ride, said <i>Obadiah</i>, shutting the door.</p>
			<p>What plagues, cried my father, going on with his calculation.⁠⸺⁠But the waters are out, said <i>Obadiah</i>,⁠—opening the door again.</p>
			<p>Till that moment, my father, who had a map of <i>Sanson’s</i>, and a book of the post-roads before him, had kept his hand upon the head of his compasses, with one foot of them fixed upon <i>Nevers</i>, the last stage he had paid for⁠—purposing to go on from that point with his journey and calculation, as soon as <i>Obadiah</i> quitted the room: but this second attack of <i>Obadiah’s</i>, in opening the door and laying the whole country under water, was too much.⁠⸺⁠He let go his compasses⁠—or rather with a mixed motion between accident and anger, he threw them upon the table; and then there was nothing for him to do, but to return back to <i>Calais</i> (like many others) as wise as he had set out.</p>
			<p>When the letter was brought into the parlour, which contained the news of my brother’s death, my father had got forwards again upon his journey to within a stride of the compasses of the very same stage of <i>Nevers</i>.⁠⸺⁠By your leave, <abbr>Mons.</abbr> <i>Sanson</i>, cried my father, striking the point of his compasses through <i>Nevers</i> into the table⁠—and nodding to my uncle <i>Toby</i> to see what was in the letter⁠—twice of one night, is too much for an <i>English</i> gentleman and his son, <abbr>Mons.</abbr> <i>Sanson</i>, to be turned back from so lousy a town as <i>Nevers</i>⁠—What think’st thou, <i>Toby?</i> added my father in a sprightly tone.⁠⸺⁠Unless it be a garrison town, said my uncle <i>Toby</i>⁠⸺⁠for then⁠⸺⁠I shall be a fool, said my father, smiling to himself, as long as I live.⁠—So giving a second nod⁠—and keeping his compasses still upon <i>Nevers</i> with one hand, and holding his book of the post-roads in the other⁠—half calculating and half listening, he leaned forwards upon the table with both elbows, as my uncle <i>Toby</i> hummed over the letter.</p>
			<p>⸻ ⸻ ⸻ ⸻ ⸻ ⸻ ⸻ ⸻ ⸻ ⸻ ⸻ ⸻ ⸻ ⸻ ⸻ ⸻ ⸻ ⸻ ⸻ ⸻ ⸻ ⸻ ⸻⁠—he’s gone! said my uncle <i>Toby</i>.⁠⸺⁠Where⁠⸺⁠Who? cried my father.⁠⸺⁠My nephew, said my uncle <i>Toby</i>.⁠⸺⁠What⁠—without leave⁠—without money⁠—without governor? cried my father in amazement. No:⁠⸺⁠he is dead, my dear brother, quoth my uncle <i>Toby</i>.⁠—Without being ill? cried my father again.⁠—I dare say not, said my uncle <i>Toby</i>, in a low voice, and fetching a deep sigh from the bottom of his heart, he has been ill enough, poor lad! I’ll answer for him⁠⸺⁠for he is dead.</p>
			<p>When <i>Agrippina</i> was told of her son’s death, <i>Tacitus</i> informs us, that, not being able to moderate the violence of her passions, she abruptly broke off her work.⁠—My father stuck his compasses into <i>Nevers</i>, but so much the faster.⁠—What contrarieties! his, indeed, was matter of calculation!⁠—<i>Agrippina’s</i> must have been quite a different affair; who else could pretend to reason from history?</p>
			<p>How my father went on, in my opinion, deserves a chapter to itself.⁠—</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
