<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title epub:type="z3998:roman">XIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-3" id="chapter-3-13" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIII</h3>
			<p>⸺⁠Bless my soul!⁠—my poor mistress is ready to faint⁠⸺⁠and her pains are gone⁠—and the drops are done⁠—and the bottle of julap is broke⁠⸺⁠and the nurse has cut her arm⁠—(and I, my thumb, cried <abbr>Dr.</abbr> <i>Slop</i>,) and the child is where it was, continued <i>Susannah</i>,⁠—and the midwife has fallen backwards upon the edge of the fender, and bruised her hip as black as your hat.⁠—I’ll look at it, quoth <abbr>Dr.</abbr> <i>Slop</i>.⁠—There is no need of that, replied <i>Susannah</i>,⁠—you had better look at my mistress⁠—but the midwife would gladly first give you an account how things are, so desires you would go upstairs and speak to her this moment.</p>
			<p>Human nature is the same in all professions.</p>
			<p>The midwife had just before been put over <abbr>Dr.</abbr> <i>Slop’s</i> head⁠—He had not digested it,⁠—No, replied <abbr>Dr.</abbr> <i>Slop</i>, ’twould be full as proper, if the midwife came down to me.⁠—I like subordination, quoth my uncle <i>Toby</i>,⁠—and but for it, after the reduction of <i>Lisle</i>, I know not what might have become of the garrison of <i>Ghent</i>, in the mutiny for bread, in the year Ten.⁠—Nor, replied <abbr>Dr.</abbr> <i>Slop</i>, (parodying my uncle <i>Toby’s</i> hobbyhorsical reflection; though full as hobbyhorsical himself)⁠⸻do I know, Captain <i>Shandy</i>, what might have become of the garrison above stairs, in the mutiny and confusion I find all things are in at present, but for the subordination of fingers and thumbs to ******⁠⸻the application of which, Sir, under this accident of mine, comes in so apropos, that without it, the cut upon my thumb might have been felt by the <i>Shandy</i> family, as long as the <i>Shandy</i> family had a name.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
