<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 18</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-6" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-6-18" epub:type="chapter">
				<h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XVIII</h2>
				<p>We should begin, said my father, turning himself half round in bed, and shifting his pillow a little towards my mother’s, as he opened the debate——We should begin to think, Mrs. <i>Shandy</i>, of putting this boy into <span class="locked">breeches.——</span></p>
				<p>We should so,—said my mother.——We defer it, my dear, quoth my father, <span class="locked">shamefully.———</span></p>
				<p>I think we do, Mr. <i>Shandy</i>,—said my mother.</p>
				<p>——Not but the child looks extremely well, said my father, in his vests and <span class="locked">tunicks.———</span></p>
				<p>———He does look very well in them,—replied my mother.———</p>
				<p>——And for that reason it would be almost a sin, added my father, to take him out of <span class="locked">’em.——</span></p>
				<p>——It would so,—said my mother:——But indeed he is growing a very tall lad,—rejoined my father.</p>
				<p>——He is very tall for his age, indeed,—said my mother.——</p>
				<p>——I can not (making two syllables of it) imagine, quoth my father, who the deuce he takes <span class="locked">after.——</span></p>
				<p>I cannot conceive, for my life,—said my mother.——</p>
				<p>Humph!——said my father.</p>
				<p>(The dialogue ceased for a moment.)</p>
				<p>——I am very short myself,—continued my father gravely.</p>
				<p>You are very short, Mr. <i>Shandy</i>,—said my mother.</p>
				<p>Humph! quoth my father to himself, a second time: in muttering which, he plucked his pillow a little further from my mother’s—and turning about again, there was an end of the debate for three minutes and a half.</p>
				<p>——When he gets these breeches made, cried my father in a higher tone, he’ll look like a beast in ’em.</p>
				<p>He will be very awkward in them at first, replied my mother.——</p>
				<p>——And ’twill be lucky, if that’s the worst on’t, added my father.</p>
				<p>It will be very lucky, answered my mother.</p>
				<p>I suppose, replied my father,—making some pause first,—he’ll be exactly like other people’s <span class="locked">children.——</span></p>
				<p>Exactly, said my mother.———</p>
				<p>——Though I shall be sorry for that, added my father: and so the debate stopp’d again.</p>
				<p>——They should be of leather, said my father, turning him about <span class="locked">again.—</span></p>
				<p>They will last him, said my mother, the longest.</p>
				<p>But he can have no linings to ’em, replied my father.———</p>
				<p>He cannot, said my mother.</p>
				<p>’Twere better to have them of fustian, quoth my father.</p>
				<p>Nothing can be better, quoth my mother.———</p>
				<p>—Except dimity,—replied my father:——’Tis best of all,—replied my mother.</p>
				<p>——One must not give him his death, however,—interrupted my father.</p>
				<p>By no means, said my mother:——and so the dialogue stood still again.</p>
				<p>I am resolved, however, quoth my father, breaking silence the fourth time, he shall have no pockets in <span class="locked">them.—</span></p>
				<p>——There is no occasion for any, said my mother.———</p>
				<p>I mean in his coat and waistcoat,—cried my father.</p>
				<p>——I mean so too,—replied my mother.</p>
				<p>——Though if he gets a gig or top——Poor souls! it is a crown and a sceptre to them,—they should have where to secure <span class="locked">it.———</span></p>
				<p>Order it as you please, Mr. <i>Shandy</i>, replied my mother.———</p>
				<p>——But don’t you think it right? added my father, pressing the point home to her.</p>
				<p>Perfectly, said my mother, if it pleases you, Mr. <i>Shandy</i>.———</p>
				<p>——There’s for you! cried my father, losing temper——Pleases me!——You never will distinguish, Mrs. <i>Shandy</i>, nor shall I ever teach you to do it, betwixt a point of pleasure and a point of convenience.——This was on the <i>Sunday</i> night:——and further this chapter sayeth not.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
