<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 17</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-7" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-7-17" epub:type="chapter">
				<h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XVII</h2>
				<p>Crack, crack⁠——crack, crack⁠——crack, crack⁠——so this is <i>Paris!</i> quoth I (continuing in the same mood)⁠—and this is <i>Paris!</i>⁠——humph!⁠——<i>Paris!</i> cried I, repeating the name the third time⁠——</p>
				<p>The first, the finest, the most brilliant⁠——</p>
				<p>The streets however are nasty.</p>
				<p>But it looks, I suppose, better than it smells⁠——crack, crack⁠——crack, crack⁠——what a fuss thou makest!⁠—as if it concerned the good people to be informed, that a man with pale face and clad in black, had the honour to be driven into <i>Paris</i> at nine o’clock at night, by a postilion in a tawny yellow jerkin, turned up with red calamanco⁠—crack, crack⁠——crack, crack⁠——crack, crack,⁠——I wish thy whip⁠——</p>
				<p>——But ’tis the spirit of thy nation; so crack⁠—crack on.</p>
				<p>Ha!⁠——and no one gives the wall!⁠——but in the <b>School</b> of <b>Urbanity</b> herself, if the walls are besh-t⁠—how can you do otherwise?</p>
				<p>And prithee when do they light the lamps? What?⁠—never in the summer months!⁠——Ho! ’tis the time of sallads.⁠——O rare! sallad and soup⁠—soup and sallad⁠—sallad and soup, <em>encore</em>⁠——</p>
				<p>——’Tis <em>too much</em> for sinners.</p>
				<p>Now I cannot bear the barbarity of it; how can that unconscionable coachman talk so much bawdy to that lean horse? don’t you see, friend, the streets are so villainously narrow, that there is not room in all <i>Paris</i> to turn a wheelbarrow? In the grandest city of the whole world, it would not have been amiss, if they had been left a thought wider; nay, were it only so much in every single street, as that a man might know (was it only for satisfaction) on which side of it he was walking.</p>
				<p>One⁠—two⁠—three⁠—four⁠—five⁠—six⁠—seven⁠—eight⁠—nine⁠—ten.⁠—Ten cook’s shops! and twice the number of barbers! and all within three minutes driving! one would think that all the cooks in the world, on some great merry-meeting with the barbers, by joint consent had said⁠—Come, let us all go live at <i>Paris</i>: the <i>French</i> love good eating⁠——they are all <i xml:lang="fr">gourmands</i>⁠——we shall rank high; if their god is their belly⁠——their cooks must be gentlemen: and forasmuch as <em>the periwig maketh the man</em>, and the periwig-maker maketh the periwig⁠—<em>ergo</em>, would the barbers say, we shall rank higher still⁠—we shall be above you all⁠—we shall be <i>Capitouls</i><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-35" id="noteref-35" epub:type="noteref">35</a> at least⁠—<em>pardi!</em> we shall all wear swords⁠——</p>
				<p>—And so, one would swear (that is, by candle light,⁠—but there is no depending upon it) they continue to do, to this day.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
