<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 14</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-2" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-2-14" epub:type="chapter">
				<h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XIV</h2>
				<p>At the end of the last chapter, my father and my uncle <i>Toby</i> were left both standing, like <i>Brutus</i> and <i>Cassius</i>, at the close of the scene, making up their accounts.</p>
				<p>As my father spoke the three last words,⁠——he sat down;⁠—my uncle <i>Toby</i> exactly followed his example, only, that before he took his chair, he rung the bell, to order Corporal <i>Trim</i>, who was in waiting, to step home for <i>Stevinus</i>:⁠—my uncle <i>Toby’s</i> house being no farther off than the opposite side of the way.</p>
				<p>Some men would have dropped the subject of <i>Stevinus</i>;⁠——but my uncle <i>Toby</i> had no resentment in his heart, and he went on with the subject, to show my father that he had none.</p>
				<p>Your sudden appearance, <abbr>Dr.</abbr> <i>Slop</i>, quoth my uncle, resuming the discourse, instantly brought <i>Stevinus</i> into my head. (My father, you may be sure, did not offer to lay any more wagers upon <i>Stevinus’s</i> head.)⁠——Because, continued my uncle <i>Toby</i>, the celebrated sailing chariot, which belonged to Prince <i>Maurice</i>, and was of such wonderful contrivance and velocity, as to carry half a dozen people thirty <i>German</i> miles, in I don’t know how few minutes,⁠——was invented by <i>Stevinus</i>, that great mathematician and engineer.</p>
				<p>You might have spared your servant the trouble, quoth <abbr>Dr.</abbr> <i>Slop</i> (as the fellow is lame) of going for <i>Stevinus’s</i> account of it, because in my return from <i>Leyden</i> thro’ the <i>Hague</i>, I walked as far as <i>Schevling</i>, which is two long miles, on purpose to take a view of it.</p>
				<p>That’s nothing, replied my uncle <i>Toby</i>, to what the learned <i>Peireskius</i> did, who walked a matter of five hundred miles, reckoning from <i>Paris</i> to <i>Schevling</i>, and from <i>Schevling</i> to <i>Paris</i> back again, in order to see it,⁠—and nothing else.</p>
				<p>Some men cannot bear to be out-gone.</p>
				<p>The more fool <i>Peireskius</i>, replied <abbr>Dr.</abbr> <i>Slop</i>. But mark, ’twas out of no contempt of <i>Peireskius</i> at all;⁠——but that <i>Peireskius’s</i> indefatigable labour in trudging so far on foot, out of love for the sciences, reduced the exploit of <abbr>Dr.</abbr> <i>Slop</i>, in that affair, to nothing:⁠—the more fool <i>Peireskius</i>, said he again.⁠—Why so?⁠—replied my father, taking his brother’s part, not only to make reparation as fast as he could for the insult he had given him, which sat still upon my father’s mind;⁠——but partly, that my father began really to interest himself in the discourse.⁠——Why so?⁠——said he. Why is <i>Peireskius</i>, or any man else, to be abused for an appetite for that, or any other morsel of sound knowledge: For notwithstanding I know nothing of the chariot in question, continued he, the inventor of it must have had a very mechanical head; and tho’ I cannot guess upon what principles of philosophy he has atchieved it;⁠—yet certainly his machine has been constructed upon solid ones, be they what they will, or it could not have answered at the rate my brother mentions.</p>
				<p>It answered, replied my uncle <i>Toby</i>, as well, if not better; for, as <i>Peireskius</i> elegantly expresses it, speaking of the velocity of its motion, <i xml:lang="la">Tam citus erat, quam erat ventus</i>; which, unless I have forgot my Latin, is, <em>that it was as swift as the wind itself</em>.</p>
				<p>But pray, <abbr>Dr.</abbr> <i>Slop</i>, quoth my father, interrupting my uncle (tho’ not without begging pardon for it at the same time) upon what principles was this selfsame chariot set a-going?⁠—Upon very pretty principles to be sure, replied <abbr>Dr.</abbr> <i>Slop</i>:⁠—And I have often wondered, continued he, evading the question, why none of our gentry, who live upon large plains like this of ours,⁠—(especially they whose wives are not past childbearing) attempt nothing of this kind; for it would not only be infinitely expeditious upon sudden calls, to which the sex is subject,⁠—if the wind only served,⁠—but would be excellent good husbandry to make use of the winds, which cost nothing, and which eat nothing, rather than horses, which (the devil take ’em) both cost and eat a great deal.</p>
				<p>For that very reason, replied my father, “Because they cost nothing, and because they eat nothing,”⁠—the scheme is bad;⁠—it is the consumption of our products, as well as the manufactures of them, which gives bread to the hungry, circulates trade,⁠—brings in money, and supports the value of our lands:⁠—and tho’, I own, if I was a Prince, I would generously recompense the scientifick head which brought forth such contrivances;⁠—yet I would as peremptorily suppress the use of them.</p>
				<p>My father here had got into his element,⁠——and was going on as prosperously with his dissertation upon trade, as my uncle <i>Toby</i> had before, upon his of fortification;⁠—but to the loss of much sound knowledge, the destinies in the morning had decreed that no dissertation of any kind should be spun by my father that day,⁠——for as he opened his mouth to begin the next sentence.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
