<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 33</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-9" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-9-33" epub:type="chapter">
				<h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXXIII</h2>
				<p>——That provision should be made for continuing the race of so great, so exalted and godlike a Being as man⁠—I am far from denying⁠—but philosophy speaks freely of everything; and therefore I still think and do maintain it to be a pity, that it should be done by means of a passion which bends down the faculties, and turns all the wisdom, contemplations, and operations of the soul backwards⁠——a passion, my dear, continued my father, addressing himself to my mother, which couples and equals wise men with fools, and makes us come out of our caverns and hiding-places more like satyrs and four-footed beasts than men.</p>
				<p>I know it will be said, continued my father (availing himself of the <i>Prolepsis</i>), that in itself, and simply taken⁠——like hunger, or thirst, or sleep⁠——’tis an affair neither good or bad⁠—or shameful or otherwise.⁠——Why then did the delicacy of <i>Diogenes</i> and <i>Plato</i> so recalcitrate against it? and wherefore, when we go about to make and plant a man, do we put out the candle? and for what reason is it, that all the parts thereof⁠—the congredients⁠—the preparations⁠—the instruments, and whatever serves thereto, are so held as to be conveyed to a cleanly mind by no language, translation, or periphrasis whatever?</p>
				<p>——The act of killing and destroying a man, continued my father, raising his voice⁠—and turning to my uncle <i>Toby</i>⁠—you see, is glorious⁠—and the weapons by which we do it are honourable⁠——We march with them upon our shoulders⁠——We strut with them by our sides⁠——We gild them⁠——We carve them⁠——We inlay them⁠——We enrich them⁠——Nay, if it be but a <em>scoundrel</em> cannon, we cast an ornament upon the breach of it.⁠—</p>
				<p>——My uncle <i>Toby</i> laid down his pipe to intercede for a better epithet⁠——and <i>Yorick</i> was rising up to batter the whole hypothesis to pieces⁠——</p>
				<p>——When <i>Obadiah</i> broke into the middle of the room with a complaint, which cried out for an immediate hearing.</p>
				<p>The case was this:</p>
				<p>My father, whether by ancient custom of the manor, or as impropriator of the great tythes, was obliged to keep a Bull for the service of the Parish, and <i>Obadiah</i> had led his cow upon a <em>pop-visit</em> to him one day or other the preceding summer⁠——I say, one day or other⁠—because as chance would have it, it was the day on which he was married to my father’s housemaid⁠——so one was a reckoning to the other. Therefore when <i>Obadiah’s</i> wife was brought to bed⁠—<i>Obadiah</i> thanked God⁠——</p>
				<p>——Now, said <i>Obadiah</i>, I shall have a calf: so <i>Obadiah</i> went daily to visit his cow.</p>
				<p>She’ll calve on <i>Monday</i>⁠—on <i>Tuesday</i>⁠—on <i>Wednesday</i> at the farthest⁠——</p>
				<p>The cow did not calve⁠——no⁠—she’ll not calve till next week⁠——the cow put it off terribly⁠——till at the end of the sixth week <i>Obadiah’s</i> suspicions (like a good man’s) fell upon the Bull.</p>
				<p>Now the parish being very large, my father’s Bull, to speak the truth of him, was no way equal to the department; he had, however, got himself, somehow or other, thrust into employment⁠—and as he went through the business with a grave face, my father had a high opinion of him.</p>
				<p>——Most of the townsmen, an’ please your worship, quoth <i>Obadiah</i>, believe that ’tis all the Bull’s fault⁠——</p>
				<p>——But may not a cow be barren? replied my father, turning to Doctor <i>Slop</i>.</p>
				<p>It never happens: said <abbr>Dr.</abbr> <i>Slop</i>, but the man’s wife may have come before her time naturally enough⁠——Prithee has the child hair upon his head?⁠—added <abbr>Dr.</abbr> <i>Slop</i>⁠———</p>
				<p>——It is as hairy as I am; said <i>Obadiah</i>.⁠——<i>Obadiah</i> had not been shaved for three weeks⁠——Wheu - - u - - - - u - - - - - - - - cried my father; beginning the sentence with an exclamatory whistle⁠——and so, brother <i>Toby</i>, this poor Bull of mine, who is as good a Bull as ever p⁠—ss’d, and might have done for <i>Europa</i> herself in purer times⁠——had he but two legs less, might have been driven into Doctors Commons and lost his character⁠——which to a Town Bull, brother <i>Toby</i>, is the very same thing as his life⁠———</p>
				<p>L⁠—d! said my mother, what is all this story about?⁠——</p>
				<p>A <strong>cock</strong> and a <strong>bull</strong>, said <i>Yorick</i>⁠——And one of the best of its kind, I ever heard.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
