<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>II</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-7" id="chapter-7-2" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</h3>
			<p>Now hang it! quoth I, as I look’d towards the <i>French</i> coast⁠—a man should know something of his own country too, before he goes abroad⁠⸺⁠and I never gave a peep into <i>Rochester</i> church, or took notice of the dock of <i>Chatham</i>, or visited <abbr>St.</abbr> <i>Thomas</i> at <i>Canterbury</i>, though they all three laid in my way⁠⸺⁠</p>
			<p>—But mine, indeed, is a particular case⁠⸺⁠</p>
			<p>So without arguing the matter further with <i>Thomas o’ Becket</i>, or anyone else⁠—I skip’d into the boat, and in five minutes we got under sail, and scudded away like the wind.</p>
			<p>Pray, captain, quoth I, as I was going down into the cabin, is a man never overtaken by <i>Death</i> in this passage?</p>
			<p>Why, there is not time for a man to be sick in it, replied he⁠⸺⁠What a cursed lyar! for I am sick as a horse, quoth I, already⁠⸺⁠what a brain!⁠⸺⁠upside down!⁠⸺⁠heyday! the cells are broke loose one into another, and the blood, and the lymph, and the nervous juices, with the fix’d and volatile salts, are all jumbled into one mass⁠⸺⁠good G⁠⸺! everything turns round in it like a thousand whirlpools⁠⸺⁠I’d give a shilling to know if I shan’t write the clearer for it⁠⸺⁠</p>
			<p>Sick! sick! sick! sick!⁠⸺⁠</p>
			<p>—When shall we get to land? captain⁠—they have hearts like stones⁠⸺⁠O I am deadly sick!⁠⸺⁠reach me that thing, boy⁠⸺’tis the most discomfiting sickness⁠⸺⁠I wish I was at the bottom⁠—Madam! how is it with you? Undone! undone! un⁠⸺⁠O! undone! sir⁠⸺⁠What the first time?⁠⸺⁠No, ’tis the second, third, sixth, tenth time, sir,⁠⸺⁠heyday!⁠—what a trampling over head!⁠—hollo! cabin boy! what’s the matter?⁠—</p>
			<p>The wind chopp’d about! s’Death!⁠—then I shall meet him full in the face.</p>
			<p>What luck!⁠—’tis chopp’d about again, master⁠⸺⁠O the devil chop it⁠⸺⁠</p>
			<p>Captain, quoth she, for heaven’s sake, let us get ashore.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
