<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 28</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-9" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-9-28" epub:type="chapter">
				<h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXVIII</h2>
				<p>——And here is the <i>Maes</i>⁠—and this is the <i>Sambre</i>; said the corporal, pointing with his right hand extended a little towards the map and his left upon <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> <i>Bridget’s</i> shoulder⁠——but not the shoulder next him⁠—and this, said he, is the town of <i>Namur</i>⁠—and this the citadel⁠—and there lay the <i>French</i>⁠—and here lay his honour and myself⁠——and in this cursed trench, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> <i>Bridget</i>, quoth the corporal, taking her by the hand, did he receive the wound which crush’d him so miserably <em>here</em>.⁠——In pronouncing which, he slightly press’d the back of her hand towards the part he felt for⁠——and let it fall.</p>
				<p>We thought, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <i>Trim</i>, it had been more in the middle,⁠——said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> <i>Bridget</i>⁠——</p>
				<p>That would have undone us forever⁠—said the corporal.</p>
				<p>——And left my poor mistress undone too, said <i>Bridget</i>.</p>
				<p>The corporal made no reply to the repartee, but by giving <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> <i>Bridget</i> a kiss.</p>
				<p>Come⁠—come⁠—said <i>Bridget</i>⁠—holding the palm of her left hand parallel to the plane of the horizon, and sliding the fingers of the other over it, in a way which could not have been done, had there been the least wart or protuberance⁠——’Tis every syllable of it false, cried the corporal, before she had half finished the sentence⁠——</p>
				<p>—I know it to be fact, said <i>Bridget</i>, from credible witnesses.</p>
				<p>———Upon my honour, said the corporal, laying his hand upon his heart and blushing, as he spoke, with honest resentment⁠—’tis a story, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> <i>Bridget</i>, as false as hell⁠——Not, said <i>Bridget</i>, interrupting him, that either I or my mistress care a halfpenny about it, whether ’tis so or no⁠———only that when one is married, one would choose to have such a thing by one at least⁠——</p>
				<p>It was somewhat unfortunate for <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> <i>Bridget</i>, that she had begun the attack with her manual exercise; for the corporal instantly <span><span>*</span> <span>*</span> <span>*</span> <span>*</span> <span>*</span> <span>*</span> <span>*</span> <span>*</span> <span>*</span></span> <span><span>*</span> <span>*</span> <span>*</span> <span>*</span> <span>*</span> <span>*</span> <span>*</span> <span>*</span> <span>*</span></span> <span><span>*</span> <span>*</span> <span>*</span> <span>*</span> <span>*</span> <span>*</span> <span>*</span> <span>*</span> <span>*</span></span> <span><span>*</span> <span>*</span> <span>*</span> <span>*.</span></span></p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
