<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 3</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-2" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-2-3" epub:type="chapter">
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</h2>
				<p>When my uncle <i>Toby</i> got his map of <i>Namur</i> to his mind, he began immediately to apply himself, and with the utmost diligence, to the study of it; for nothing being of more importance to him than his recovery, and his recovery depending, as you have read, upon the passions and affections of his mind, it behoved him to take the nicest care to make himself so far master of his subject, as to be able to talk upon it without emotion.</p>
				<p>In a fortnight’s close and painful application, which, by the bye, did my uncle <i>Toby’s</i> wound, upon his groin, no good,⁠—he was enabled, by the help of some marginal documents at the feet of the elephant, together with <i>Gobesius’s</i> military architecture and pyroballogy, translated from the <i>Flemish</i>, to form his discourse with passable perspicuity; and before he was two full months gone,⁠—he was right eloquent upon it, and could make not only the attack of the advanced counterscarp with great order;⁠⸺⁠but having, by that time, gone much deeper into the art, than what his first motive made necessary, my uncle <i>Toby</i> was able to cross the <i>Maes</i> and <i>Sambre</i>; make diversions as far as <i>Vauban’s</i> line, the abbey of <i>Salsines</i>, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, and give his visitors as distinct a history of each of their attacks, as of that of the gate of <i><abbr>St.</abbr> Nicolas</i>, where he had the honour to receive his wound.</p>
				<p>But desire of knowledge, like the thirst of riches, increases ever with the acquisition of it. The more my uncle <i>Toby</i> pored over his map, the more he took a liking to it!⁠—by the same process and electrical assimilation, as I told you, through which I ween the souls of connoisseurs themselves, by long friction and incumbition, have the happiness, at length, to get all be-virtu’d⁠—be-pictured,⁠—be-butterflied, and befiddled.</p>
				<p>The more my uncle <i>Toby</i> drank of this sweet fountain of science, the greater was the heat and impatience of his thirst, so that before the first year of his confinement had well gone round, there was scarce a fortified town in <i>Italy</i> or <i>Flanders</i>, of which, by one means or other, he had not procured a plan, reading over as he got them, and carefully collating therewith the histories of their sieges, their demolitions, their improvements, and new works, all which he would read with that intense application and delight, that he would forget himself, his wound, his confinement, his dinner.</p>
				<p>In the second year my uncle <i>Toby</i> purchased <i>Ramelli</i> and <i>Cataneo</i>, translated from the <i>Italian</i>;⁠—likewise <i>Stevinus</i>, <i>Moralis</i>, the Chevalier <i>de Ville</i>, <i>Lorini</i>, <i>Cochorn</i>, <i>Sheeter</i>, the Count <i>de Pagan</i>, the Marshal <i>Vauban</i>, <abbr>Mons.</abbr> <i>Blondel</i>, with almost as many more books of military architecture, as Don <i>Quixote</i> was found to have of chivalry, when the curate and barber invaded his library.</p>
				<p>Towards the beginning of the third year, which was in <i>August</i>, ninety-nine, my uncle <i>Toby</i> found it necessary to understand a little of projectiles:⁠—and having judged it best to draw his knowledge from the fountainhead, he began with <i><abbr class="name">N.</abbr> Tartaglia</i>, who it seems was the first man who detected the imposition of a cannonball’s doing all that mischief under the notion of a right line⁠—This <i><abbr class="name">N.</abbr> Tartaglia</i> proved to my uncle <i>Toby</i> to be an impossible thing.</p>
				<p>⸺⁠Endless is the search of Truth.</p>
				<p>No sooner was my uncle <i>Toby</i> satisfied which road the cannonball did not go, but he was insensibly led on, and resolved in his mind to enquire and find out which road the ball did go: For which purpose he was obliged to set off afresh with old <i>Maltus</i>, and studied him devoutly.⁠—He proceeded next to <i>Galileo</i> and <i>Torricellius</i>, wherein, by certain Geometrical rules, infallibly laid down, he found the precise part to be a <b>Parabola</b>⁠—or else an <b>Hyperbola</b>,⁠—and that the parameter, or latus rectum, of the conic section of the said path, was to the quantity and amplitude in a direct <em>ratio</em>, as the whole line to the sine of double the angle of incidence, formed by the breech upon an horizontal plane;⁠—and that the semiparameter,⁠⸺⁠stop! my dear uncle <i>Toby</i>⁠⸺⁠stop!⁠—go not one foot farther into this thorny and bewildered track,⁠—intricate are the steps! intricate are the mazes of this labyrinth! intricate are the troubles which the pursuit of this bewitching phantom <b>Knowledge</b> will bring upon thee.⁠—O my uncle;⁠—fly⁠—fly, fly from it as from a serpent.⁠⸺⁠Is it fit⁠⸺⁠good-natured man! thou should’st sit up, with the wound upon thy groin, whole nights baking thy blood with hectic watchings?⁠⸺⁠Alas! ’twill exasperate thy symptoms,⁠—check thy perspirations⁠—evaporate thy spirits⁠—waste thy animal strength,⁠—dry up thy radical moisture, bring thee into a costive habit of body,⁠⸺⁠impair thy health,⁠⸺⁠and hasten all the infirmities of thy old age.⁠⸺⁠O my uncle! my uncle <i>Toby</i>.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
