<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 43</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-5" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-5-43" epub:type="chapter">
				<h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XLIII</h2>
<p><span class="firstword">My</span> father took a single turn across
the room, then sat down, and finished the chapter.</p>
<p>The verbs auxiliary we are concerned in here, continued my father,
are, <i>am</i>; <i>was</i>; <i>have</i>; <i>had</i>; <i>do</i>;
<i>did</i>; <i>make</i>; <i>made</i>; <i>suffer</i>; <i>shall</i>;
<i>should</i>; <i>will</i>; <i>would</i>; <i>can</i>; <i>could</i>;
<i>owe</i>; <i>ought</i>; <i>used</i>; or <i>is wont</i>.—And
these varied with tenses, <i>present</i>, <i>past</i>, <i>future</i>,
and conjugated with the verb <i>see</i>,—or with these questions
added to them;—<i>Is it? Was it? Will it be? Would it be? May it
be? Might it be?</i> And these again put negatively, <i>Is it not? Was
it not? Ought it not?</i>—Or affirmatively,—<i>It is</i>;
<i>It was</i>; <i>It ought to be</i>. Or chronologically,—<i>Has
it been always? Lately? How long ago?</i>—Or
hypothetically,—<i>If it was? If it was not?</i> What would
follow?——If the <i>French</i> should beat the
<i>English?</i> If the <i>Sun</i> go out of the <i>Zodiac?</i></p>
<p>Now, by the right use and application of these, continued my father,
in which a child’s memory should be exercised, there is no one idea can
enter his brain, how barren soever, but a magazine of conceptions and
conclusions may be drawn forth from it.——Didst thou ever see
a white bear? cried my father, turning his head round to <i>Trim</i>,
who stood at the back of his chair:—No, an’ please your honour,
replied the corporal.——But thou couldst discourse about one,
<i>Trim</i>, said my father, in case of need?—How is it possible,
brother, quoth my uncle <i>Toby</i>, if the corporal never saw
one?——’Tis the fact I want, replied my father,—and the
possibility of it is as follows.</p>
<p><span class="smallcaps">A white bear!</span> Very well. Have I ever
seen one? Might
<span class="pagenum">
<a id="page299" name="page299">299</a></span>
I ever have seen one? Am I ever to see one? Ought I ever to have seen
one? Or can I ever see one?</p>
<p>Would I had seen a white bear! (for how can I imagine it?)</p>
<p>If I should see a white bear, what would I say? If I should never see
a white bear, what then?</p>
<p>If I never have, can, must, or shall see a white bear alive; have I
ever seen the skin of one? Did I ever see one painted?—described?
Have I never dreamed of one?</p>
<p>Did my father, mother, uncle, aunt, brothers or sisters, ever see a
white bear? What would they give? How would they behave? How would the
white bear have behaved? Is he wild? Tame? Terrible? Rough? Smooth?</p>
<p>—Is the white bear worth seeing?—</p>
<p>—Is there no sin in it?—</p>
<p>Is it better than a <span class="smallroman">BLACK ONE</span>?</p>
<div class="footnote">
<p><a href="#tag_5_1" id="note_5_1" name="note_5_1">1.</a>
This book my father would never consent to publish; ’tis in manuscript,
with some other tracts of his, in the family, all, or most of which will
be printed in due time.</p>
<p><a href="#tag_5_2" id="note_5_2" name="note_5_2">2.</a>
Mr. <i>Shandy</i> is supposed to mean ******** *** Esq.; member for
******, ——and not the <i>Chinese</i> Legislator.</p>
<p><a href="#tag_5_3" id="note_5_3" name="note_5_3">3.</a>
<span class="greek" title="Chalepês nosou, kai dusiatou apallagên, hên anthraka kalousin.">Χαλεπῆς νόσου, καὶ δυσιάτου <ins class="correction" title="printed ἀπαλλαγὴ [apallagê]">ἀπαλλαγὴν</ins>, ἣν
ἄνθρακα καλοῦσιν.</span>—<span class="smallcaps">Philo</span>.</p>
<p><a href="#tag_5_4" id="note_5_4" name="note_5_4">4.</a>
<span class="greek" title="Ta temnomena tôn ethnôn polugonôtata, kai poluanthrôpotata einai.">Τὰ τεμνόμενα τῶν ἐθνῶν τολυγονώτατα, καὶ
πολυανθρωπότατα εἶναι.</span></p>
<p><a href="#tag_5_5" id="note_5_5" name="note_5_5">5.</a>
<span class="greek" title="Kathariotêtos heineken.">Καθαριότητος
εἵνεκεν.</span>—<span class="smallcaps">Bochart</span>.</p>
<p><a href="#tag_5_6" id="note_5_6" name="note_5_6">6.</a>
<span class="greek" title="Ho Ilos, ta aidoia peritemnetai, tauto poiêsai kai tous ham’ autô summachous katanankasas.">Ὁ Ἶλος, τὰ αἰδοῖα
περιτέμνεται, ταὐτὸ ποιῆσαι καὶ τοὺς ἅμ’ αυτῷ συμμάχους
καταναγκάσας.</span>—<span class="smallcaps">Sanchuniatho.</span></p>
<p class="mynote">
Note 6 as printed: Ὁ Ιλος, τὰ ἀιδοῖα περιτέμνεται, τἀυτὸ ποῖησαι καὶ
τοὺς ἅμ’ αυτῷ συμμὰχους καταναγκάσας. The errors in the diacritics do
not affect the transliteration.</p>
</div>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
