<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 6</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-9" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-9-6" epub:type="chapter">
				<h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">VI</h2>
<p><span class="firstword">When</span> <i>Tom</i>, an’ please your
honour, got to the shop, there was nobody in it, but a poor negro girl,
with a bunch of white feathers slightly tied to the end of a long cane,
flapping away flies—not killing them.——’Tis a pretty
picture! said my uncle <i>Toby</i>—she had suffered persecution,
<i>Trim</i>, and had learnt <span class="locked">mercy——</span></p>
<p>——She was good, an’ please your honour, from nature, as
well as from hardships; and there are circumstances in the story of that
poor friendless slut, that would melt a heart of
stone, said <i>Trim</i>; and some dismal winter’s evening, when your
honour is in the humour, they shall be told you with the rest of
<i>Tom’s</i> story, for it makes a part of <span class="locked">it——</span></p>
<p>Then do not forget, <i>Trim</i>, said my uncle <i>Toby</i>.</p>
<p>A negro has a soul? an’ please your honour, said the corporal
(doubtingly).</p>
<p>I am not much versed, corporal, quoth my uncle <i>Toby</i>, in things
of that kind; but I suppose, God would not leave him without one, any
more than thee or <span class="locked">me——</span></p>
<p>——It would be putting one sadly over the head of another,
quoth the corporal.</p>
<p>It would so; said my uncle <i>Toby</i>. Why then, an’ please your
honour, is a black wench to be used worse than a white one?</p>
<p>I can give no reason, said my uncle
<i>Toby</i>———</p>
<p>——Only, cried the corporal, shaking his head, because she
has no one to stand up for <span class="locked">her——</span></p>
<p>——’Tis that very thing, <i>Trim</i>, quoth my uncle
<i>Toby</i>,——which recommends her to
protection——and her brethren with her; ’tis the fortune of
war which has put the whip into our hands <i>now</i>——where
it may be hereafter, heaven knows!——but be it where it will,
the brave, <i>Trim!</i> will not use it unkindly.</p>
<p>——God forbid, said the corporal.</p>
<p>Amen, responded my uncle <i>Toby</i>, laying his hand upon his
heart.</p>
<p>The corporal returned to his story, and went on——but with
an embarrassment in doing it, which here and there a reader in this
world will not be able to comprehend; for by the many sudden transitions
all along, from one kind and cordial passion to another, in getting thus
far on his way, he had lost the sportable key of his voice, which gave
sense and spirit to his tale: he attempted twice to resume it, but could
not please himself; so giving a stout hem! to rally back the retreating
spirits, and aiding nature at the same time with his left arm a-kimbo on
one side, and with his right a little extended, supporting her on the
other—the corporal got as near the note as he could; and in that
attitude, continued his story.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
