<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title epub:type="z3998:roman">XIX</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-6" id="chapter-6-19" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIX</h3>
			<p>After my father had debated the affair of the breeches with my mother,⁠—he consulted <i>Albertus Rubenius</i> upon it; and <i>Albertus Rubenius</i> used my father ten times worse in the consultation (if possible) than even my father had used my mother: For as <i>Rubenius</i> had wrote a quarto <em>express</em>, <i xml:lang="la">De re Vestiaria Veterum</i>,⁠—it was <i>Rubenius’s</i> business to have given my father some lights.⁠—On the contrary, my father might as well have thought of extracting the seven cardinal virtues out of a long beard,⁠—as of extracting a single word out of <i>Rubenius</i> upon the subject.</p>
			<p>Upon every other article of ancient dress, <i>Rubenius</i> was very communicative to my father;⁠—gave him a full and satisfactory account of</p>
			<ul>
				<li>
					<p>The Toga, or loose gown.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>The Chlamys.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>The Ephod.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>The Tunica, or Jacket.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>The Synthesis.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>The Pænula.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>The Lacema, with its Cucullus.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>The Paludamentum.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>The Prætexta.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>The Sagum, or soldier’s jerkin.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>The Trabea: of which, according to <i>Suetonius</i>, there were three kinds.⁠—</p>
				</li>
			</ul>
			<p>⸺⁠But what are all these to the breeches? said my father.</p>
			<p><i>Rubenius</i> threw him down upon the counter all kinds of shoes which had been in fashion with the <i>Romans</i>.⁠⸻</p>
			<div>
				<p>There was,</p>
				<ul>
					<li>
						<p>The open shoe.</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>The close shoe.</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>The slip shoe.</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>The wooden shoe.</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>The soc.</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>The buskin.</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>And The military shoe with hobnails in it, which <i>Juvenal</i> takes notice of.</p>
					</li>
				</ul>
			</div>
			<div>
				<p>There were,</p>
				<ul>
					<li>
						<p>The clogs.</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>The pattins.</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>The pantoufles.</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>The brogues.</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>The sandals, with latchets to them.</p>
					</li>
				</ul>
			</div>
			<div>
				<p>There was,</p>
				<ul>
					<li>
						<p>The felt shoe.</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>The linen shoe.</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>The laced shoe.</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>The braided shoe.</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>The calceus incisus.</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>And The calceus rostratus.</p>
					</li>
				</ul>
			</div>
			<p><i>Rubenius</i> showed my father how well they all fitted,⁠—in what manner they laced on,⁠—with what points, straps, thongs, latchets, ribbons, jaggs, and ends.⁠⸻</p>
			<p>⸺⁠But I want to be informed about the breeches, said my father.</p>
			<p><i>Albertus Rubenius</i> informed my father that the <i>Romans</i> manufactured stuffs of various fabrics,⁠⸺⁠some plain,⁠—some striped,⁠—others diapered throughout the whole contexture of the wool, with silk and gold⁠⸺⁠That linen did not begin to be in common use till towards the declension of the empire, when the <i>Egyptians</i> coming to settle amongst them, brought it into vogue.</p>
			<p>⸺⁠That persons of quality and fortune distinguished themselves by the fineness and whiteness of their clothes; which colour (next to purple, which was appropriated to the great offices) they most affected, and wore on their birthdays and public rejoicings.⁠⸺⁠That it appeared from the best historians of those times, that they frequently sent their clothes to the fuller, to be clean’d and whitened:⁠⸺⁠but that the inferior people, to avoid that expense, generally wore brown clothes, and of a something coarser texture,⁠—till towards the beginning of <i>Augustus’s</i> reign, when the slave dressed like his master, and almost every distinction of habiliment was lost, but the <i>Latus Clavus</i>.</p>
			<p>And what was the <i>Latus Clavus?</i> said my father.</p>
			<p><i>Rubenius</i> told him, that the point was still litigating amongst the learned:⁠⸺⁠That <i>Egnatius</i>, <i>Sigonius</i>, <i>Bossius Ticinensis</i>, <i>Bayfius</i>, <i>Budæus</i>, <i>Salmasius</i>, <i>Lipsius</i>, <i>Lazius</i>, <i>Isaac Casaubon</i>, and <i>Joseph Scaliger</i>, all differed from each other,⁠—and he from them: That some took it to be the button,⁠—some the coat itself,⁠—others only the colour of it:⁠—That the great <i>Bayfius</i>, in his Wardrobe of the Ancients, <abbr>chap.</abbr> 12⁠—honestly said, he knew not what it was,⁠—whether a tibula,⁠—a stud,⁠—a button,⁠—a loop,⁠—a buckle,⁠—or clasps and keepers.⁠⸻</p>
			<p>⸺⁠My father lost the horse, but not the saddle⁠⸺⁠They are <em>hooks and eyes</em>, said my father⁠⸺⁠and with hooks and eyes he ordered my breeches to be made.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
