<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 32</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-5" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-5-32" epub:type="chapter">
				<h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXXII</h2>
<p><span class="firstword">Trim</span> can repeat every word of it by
heart, quoth my uncle <i>Toby</i>.—Pugh! said my father, not
caring to be interrupted with <i>Trim’s</i> saying his Catechism. He
can, upon my honour, replied my uncle <i>Toby</i>.—Ask him, Mr.
<i>Yorick</i>, any question you <span class="locked">please.——</span></p>
<p>—The fifth Commandment, <i>Trim</i>—said <i>Yorick</i>,
speaking mildly, and with a gentle nod, as to a modest Catechumen. The
corporal stood silent.—You don’t ask him right, said my uncle
<i>Toby</i>, raising his voice, and giving it rapidly like the word of
command:——The fifth————cried my
uncle <i>Toby</i>.—I must begin with the first, an’ please
your honour, said the <span class="locked">corporal.——</span></p>
<p>—<i>Yorick</i> could not forbear smiling.—Your reverence
does not consider, said the corporal, shouldering his stick like a
musket, and marching into the middle of the room, to illustrate his
position,—that ’tis exactly the same thing, as doing one’s
exercise in the <span class="locked">field.—</span></p>
<p>“<i>Join your right-hand to your firelock</i>,” cried the corporal,
giving the word of command, and performing the <span class="locked">motion.—</span></p>
<p>“<i>Poise your firelock</i>,” cried the corporal, doing the duty
still both of adjutant and private man.</p>
<p>“<i>Rest your firelock</i>;”—one motion, an’ please your
reverence, you see leads into another.—If his honour will begin
but with the <span class="locked"><i>first</i>—</span></p>
<span class="pagenum">
<a id="page289" name="page289">289</a></span>
<p><span class="smallcaps">The first</span>—cried my uncle
<i>Toby</i>, setting his hand upon his side—<span id="hisside"></span>
<script type="text/javascript">
  asterisks("hisside",1.7,0);
</script>
<noscript>
<span class="space35">* * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *</span></noscript>
<!-- </p> -->
<p><span class="smallcaps">The second</span>—cried my uncle
<i>Toby</i>, waving his tobacco-pipe, as he would have done his sword at
the head of a regiment.—The corporal went through his
<i>manual</i> with exactness! and having <i>honoured his father and
mother</i>, made a low bow, and fell back to the side of the room.</p>
<p>Everything in this world, said my father, is big with jest,—and
has wit in it, and instruction too,—if we can but find it out.</p>
<p>—Here is the <i>scaffold work</i> of <span class="smallcaps">Instruction</span>, its true point of folly, without the
<span class="smallroman">BUILDING</span> behind it.</p>
<p>—Here is the glass for pedagogues, preceptors, tutors,
governors, gerund-grinders, and bear-leaders, to view themselves in, in
their true <span class="locked">dimensions.—</span></p>
<p>Oh! there is a husk and shell, <i>Yorick</i>, which grows up with
learning, which their unskilfulness knows not how to fling away!</p>
<p>—<span class="smallcaps">Sciences may be learned by rote, but
Wisdom not.</span></p>
<p><i>Yorick</i> thought my father inspired.—I will enter into
obligations this moment, said my father, to lay out all my aunt
<i>Dinah’s</i> legacy in charitable uses (of which, by the bye, my
father had no high opinion), if the corporal has any one determinate
idea annexed to any one word he has repeated.—Prythee,
<i>Trim</i>, quoth my father, turning round to him,—What dost thou
mean, by “<i>honouring thy father and mother?</i>”</p>
<p>Allowing them, an’ please your honour, three half-pence a day out of
my pay, when they grow old.—And didst thou do that, <i>Trim?</i>
said <i>Yorick</i>.—He did indeed, replied my uncle
<i>Toby</i>.—Then, <i>Trim</i>, said <i>Yorick</i>, springing out
of his chair, and taking the corporal by the hand, thou art the best
commentator upon that part of the <i>Decalogue</i>; and I honour thee
more for it, corporal <i>Trim</i>, than if thou hadst had a hand in the
<i>Talmud</i> itself.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
