<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 35</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-8" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-8-35" epub:type="chapter">
				<h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXXV</h2>
				<p>Whilst my father was writing his letter of instructions, my uncle <i>Toby</i> and the corporal were busy in preparing everything for the attack. As the turning of the thin scarlet breeches was laid aside (at least for the present), there was nothing which should put it off beyond the next morning; so accordingly it was resolved upon, for eleven o’clock.</p>
				<p>Come, my dear, said my father to my mother—’twill be but like a brother and sister, if you and I take a walk down to my brother <i>Toby’s</i>——to countenance him in this attack of his.</p>
				<p>My uncle <i>Toby</i> and the corporal had been accoutred both some time, when my father and mother enter’d, and the clock striking eleven, were that moment in motion to sally forth—but the account of this is worth more than to be wove into the fag end of the eighth<a class="tag" href="#note_8_7" id="tag_8_7" name="tag_8_7">7</a> volume of such a work as this.——My father had no time but to put the letter of instructions into my uncle <i>Toby’s</i> coat-pocket——and join with my mother in wishing his attack prosperous.</p>
				<p>I could like, said my mother, to look through the key-hole out of curiosity——Call it by its right name, my dear, quoth my <span class="locked">father—</span></p>
				<p><i>And look through the key-hole</i> as long as you will.</p>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p><a href="#tag_8_1" id="note_8_1" name="note_8_1">1.</a> Vid. <a href="#page347">pp. 347-348</a>.</p>
					<p><a href="#tag_8_2" id="note_8_2" name="note_8_2">2.</a> Vid. <i>Pope’s</i> Portrait.</p>
					<p><a href="#tag_8_3" id="note_8_3" name="note_8_3">3.</a> Alluding to the first edition.</p>
					<p><a href="#tag_8_4" id="note_8_4" name="note_8_4">4.</a><i>Rodope Thracia</i> tam inevitabili fascino instructa, tam exactè oculus intuens attraxit, ut si in illam quis incidisset, fieri non posset, quin caperetur.——I know not who.</p>
					<p><a href="#tag_8_5" id="note_8_5" name="note_8_5">5.</a> This will be printed with my father’s Life of <i>Socrates</i>, &amp;c. &amp;c.</p>
					<p><a href="#tag_8_6" id="note_8_6" name="note_8_6">6.</a> Mr. <i>Shandy</i> must mean the poor <i>in spirit</i>; inasmuch as they divided the money amongst themselves.</p>
					<p><a href="#tag_8_7" id="note_8_7" name="note_8_7">7.</a> Alluding to the first edition.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="page"> </div>
				<h2>
					<a id="bookIX_title" name="bookIX_title">
						<span class="small">THE LIFE AND OPINIONS</span>
					</a>
					<br/>
					<span class="tiny">OF</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="extended">TRISTRAM SHANDY</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="smaller">GENTLEMAN</span>
				</h2>
				<div class="heading">
					<p>Non enim excursus hic ejus, sed opus ipsum est. <span class="author"><span class="smallcaps">Plin.</span> Lib. v. Epist. 6.</span></p>
					<p class="deephang">Si quid urbaniusculè lusum a nobis, per Musas et Charitas et omnium poëtarum Numina, Oro te, ne me malè capias.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="page">
					<h3>
						<a id="bookIX_dedic" name="bookIX_dedic">A DEDICATION</a>
						<br/>
						<span class="small extended">TO A GREAT MAN</span>
					</h3>
					<p>Having, <i>a priori</i>, intended to dedicate <i>The Amours of my Uncle Toby</i> to Mr. ***——I see more reasons, <i>a posteriori</i>, for doing it <ins class="correction" title="text reads ‘too’">to</ins> Lord *******.</p>
					<p class="space">I should lament from my soul, if this exposed me to the jealousy of their Reverences; because <i>a posteriori</i>, in Court-latin, signifies the kissing hands for preferment—or anything else—in order to get it.</p>
					<p class="space">My opinion of Lord ******* is neither better nor worse, than it was of Mr. ***. Honours, like impressions upon coin, may give an ideal and local value to a bit of base metal; but Gold and Silver will pass all the world over without any other recommendation than their own weight.</p>
					<p class="space">The same good-will that made me think of offering up half an hour’s amusement to Mr. *** when out of place—operates more forcibly at present, as half an hour’s amusement will be more serviceable and refreshing after labour and sorrow, than after a philosophical repast.</p>
					<p class="space">Nothing is so perfectly <i>amusement</i> as a total change of ideas; no ideas are so totally different as those of Ministers, and innocent Lovers: for which reason, when I come to talk of Statesmen and Patriots, and set such marks upon them as will prevent confusion and mistakes concerning them for the future—I propose to dedicate that Volume to some gentle Shepherd,</p>
					<div class="verse">
						<p>Whose thoughts proud Science never taught to stray,</p>
						<p>Far as the Statesman’s walk or Patriot-way;</p>
						<p>Yet <i>simple Nature</i> to his hopes had given</p>
						<p>Out of a cloud-capp’d head a humbler heaven;</p>
						<p>Some <i>untam’d</i> World in depths of wood embraced—</p>
						<p>Some happier Island in the watry-waste—</p>
						<p>And where admitted to that equal sky,</p>
						<p>His <i>faithful Dog</i> should bear him company.</p>
					</div>
					<p class="space">In a word, by thus introducing an entire new set of objects to his Imagination, I shall unavoidably give a <i>Diversion</i> to his passionate and love-sick Contemplations. In the meantime,</p>
					<p class="center">I am</p>
					<p class="right">THE AUTHOR.</p>
				</div>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
