<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>The Eighteenth Chapter</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-9" id="chapter-9-18b" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="title">The Eighteenth Chapter</h3>
			<p>As <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> <i>Bridget</i> opened the door before the corporal had well given the rap, the interval betwixt that and my uncle <i>Toby’s</i> introduction into the parlour, was so short, that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> <i>Wadman</i> had but just time to get from behind the curtain⁠⸺⁠lay a Bible upon the table, and advance a step or two towards the door to receive him.</p>
			<p>My uncle <i>Toby</i> saluted <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> <i>Wadman</i>, after the manner in which women were saluted by men in the year of our Lord God one thousand seven hundred and thirteen⁠⸺⁠then facing about, he march’d up abreast with her to the sofa, and in three plain words⁠⸺⁠though not before he was sat down⁠⸺⁠nor after he was sat down⁠⸺⁠but as he was sitting down, told her, “<em>he was in love</em>”⁠⸺⁠so that my uncle <i>Toby</i> strained himself more in the declaration than he needed.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> <i>Wadman</i> naturally looked down, upon a slit she had been darning up in her apron, in expectation every moment, that my uncle <i>Toby</i> would go on; but having no talents for amplification, and Love moreover of all others being a subject of which he was the least a master⁠⸺⁠When he had told <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> <i>Wadman</i> once that he loved her, he let it alone, and left the matter to work after its own way.</p>
			<p>My father was always in raptures with this system of my uncle <i>Toby’s</i>, as he falsely called it, and would often say, that could his brother <i>Toby</i> to his process have added but a pipe of tobacco⁠⸺⁠he had wherewithal to have found his way, if there was faith in a <i>Spanish</i> proverb, towards the hearts of half the women upon the globe.</p>
			<p>My uncle <i>Toby</i> never understood what my father meant; nor will I presume to extract more from it, than a condemnation of an error which the bulk of the world lie under⁠⸺⁠but the <i>French</i> every one of ’em to a man, who believe in it, almost, as much as the <strong>real presence</strong>, “<em>That talking of love, is making it.</em>”</p>
			<p>⸻I would as soon set about making a black-pudding by the same receipt.</p>
			<p>Let us go on: <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> <i>Wadman</i> sat in expectation my uncle <i>Toby</i> would do so, to almost the first pulsation of that minute, wherein silence on one side or the other, generally becomes indecent: so edging herself a little more towards him, and raising up her eyes, sub-blushing, as she did it⁠⸺⁠she took up the gauntlet⁠⸺⁠or the discourse (if you like it better) and communed with my uncle <i>Toby</i>, thus:</p>
			<p>The cares and disquietudes of the marriage state, quoth <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> <i>Wadman</i>, are very great. I suppose so⁠—said my uncle <i>Toby</i>: and therefore when a person, continued <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> <i>Wadman</i>, is so much at his ease as you are⁠—so happy, captain <i>Shandy</i>, in yourself, your friends and your amusements⁠—I wonder, what reasons can incline you to the state⁠⸻</p>
			<p>⸺⁠They are written, quoth my uncle <i>Toby</i>, in the Common-Prayer Book.</p>
			<p>Thus far my uncle <i>Toby</i> went on warily, and kept within his depth, leaving <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> <i>Wadman</i> to sail upon the gulf as she pleased.</p>
			<p>⸺⁠As for children⁠—said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> <i>Wadman</i>⁠—though a principal end perhaps of the institution, and the natural wish, I suppose, of every parent⁠—yet do not we all find, they are certain sorrows, and very uncertain comforts? and what is there, dear sir, to pay one for the heartaches⁠—what compensation for the many tender and disquieting apprehensions of a suffering and defenceless mother who brings them into life? I declare, said my uncle <i>Toby</i>, smit with pity, I know of none; unless it be the pleasure which it has pleased God⁠⸺⁠</p>
			<p>A fiddlestick! quoth she.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
