<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-2" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-2-11" epub:type="chapter">
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XI</h2>
				<p>Writing, when properly managed (as you may be sure I think mine is) is but a different name for conversation. As no one, who knows what he is about in good company, would venture to talk all;⁠⸺⁠so no author, who understands the just boundaries of decorum and good-breeding, would presume to think all: The truest respect which you can pay to the reader’s understanding, is to halve this matter amicably, and leave him something to imagine, in his turn, as well as yourself.</p>
				<p>For my own part, I am eternally paying him compliments of this kind, and do all that lies in my power to keep his imagination as busy as my own.</p>
				<p>’Tis his turn now;⁠—I have given an ample description of <abbr>Dr.</abbr> <i>Slop’s</i> sad overthrow, and of his sad appearance in the back-parlour;⁠—his imagination must now go on with it for a while.</p>
				<p>Let the reader imagine then, that <abbr>Dr.</abbr> <i>Slop</i> has told his tale⁠—and in what words, and with what aggravations, his fancy chooses;⁠—Let him suppose, that <i>Obadiah</i> has told his tale also, and with such rueful looks of affected concern, as he thinks best will contrast the two figures as they stand by each other.⁠⸺⁠Let him imagine, that my father has stepped upstairs to see my mother.⁠—And, to conclude this work of imagination⁠—let him imagine the doctor washed,⁠—rubbed down, and condoled,⁠—felicitated,⁠—got into a pair of <i>Obadiah’s</i> pumps, stepping forwards towards the door, upon the very point of entering upon action.</p>
				<p>Truce!⁠—truce, good <abbr>Dr.</abbr> <i>Slop</i>:⁠—stay thy obstetrick hand;⁠⸺⁠return it safe into thy bosom to keep it warm;⁠⸺⁠little dost thou know what obstacles,⁠⸻little dost thou think what hidden causes, retard its operation!⁠⸺⁠Hast thou, <abbr>Dr.</abbr> <i>Slop</i>,⁠—hast thou been entrusted with the secret articles of the solemn treaty which has brought thee into this place?⁠—Art thou aware that at this instant, a daughter of <i>Lucina</i> is put obstetrically over thy head? Alas!⁠—’tis too true.⁠—Besides, great son of <i>Pilumnus!</i> what canst thou do?⁠—Thou hast come forth unarm’d;⁠—thou hast left thy <i xml:lang="fr">tire-tête</i>,⁠—thy new-invented <em>forceps</em>,⁠—thy <em>crotchet</em>,⁠—thy <em>squirt</em>, and all thy instruments of salvation and deliverance, behind thee,⁠—By Heaven! at this moment they are hanging up in a green bays bag, betwixt thy two pistols, at the bed’s head!⁠—Ring;⁠—call;⁠—send <i>Obadiah</i> back upon the coach-horse to bring them with all speed.</p>
				<p>⸺⁠Make great haste, <i>Obadiah</i>, quoth my father, and I’ll give thee a crown!⁠—and quoth my uncle <i>Toby</i>, I’ll give him another.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
