<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 8</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-9" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-9-8" epub:type="chapter">
				<h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">VIII</h2>
<p><span class="firstword">All</span> womankind, continued
<i>Trim</i>, (commenting upon his story) from the highest to the lowest,
an’ please your honour, love jokes; the difficulty is to know how they
chuse to have them cut; and there is no knowing that, but by trying, as
we do with our artillery in the field, by raising or letting down their
breeches, till we hit the <span class="locked">mark.——</span></p>
<p>——I like the comparison, said my uncle <i>Toby</i>,
better than the thing <span class="locked">itself——</span></p>
<p>——Because your honour, quoth the corporal, loves glory,
more than pleasure.</p>
<p>I hope, <i>Trim</i>, answered my uncle <i>Toby</i>, I love mankind
more than either; and as the knowledge of arms tends so apparently to
the good and quiet of the world——and particularly that
branch of it which we have practised together in our bowling-green, has
no object but to shorten the strides of <span class="smallcaps">Ambition</span>, and intrench the lives and fortunes of the
<i>few</i>, from the plunderings of the
<i>many</i>——whenever that drum beats in our ears,
I trust, corporal, we shall neither of us want so much humanity and
fellow-feeling, as to face about and march.</p>
<p>In pronouncing this, my uncle <i>Toby</i> faced about, and march’d
firmly as at the head of his company——and the faithful
corporal, shouldering his stick, and striking his hand upon his
coat-skirt as he took his first step——march’d close behind
him down the avenue.</p>
<p>——Now what can their two noddles be about? cried my
father to my mother——by all that’s strange, they are
besieging Mrs. <i>Wadman</i> in form, and are marching round her house
to mark out the lines of circumvallation.</p>
<p>I dare say, quoth my
mother——————But stop, dear
Sir——for what my mother dared to say upon the
occasion——and what my father did say upon
it——with her replies and his rejoinders, shall be read,
perused, paraphrased, commented, and descanted upon—or to say it
all in a word, shall be thumb’d over by Posterity in a chapter
apart——I say, by Posterity—and
<span class="pagenum">
<a id="page450" name="page450">450</a></span>
care not, if I repeat the word again—for what has this book done
more than the Legation of <i>Moses</i>, or the Tale of a Tub, that it
may not swim down the gutter of Time along with them?</p>
<p>I will not argue the matter: Time wastes too fast: every letter I
trace tells me with what rapidity Life follows my pen; the days and
hours of it, more precious, my dear <i>Jenny!</i> than the rubies about
thy neck, are flying over our heads like light clouds of a windy day,
never to return more——everything presses
on——whilst thou art twisting that lock,——see! it
grows grey; and every time I kiss thy hand to bid adieu, and every
absence which follows it, are preludes to that eternal separation which
we are shortly to <span class="locked">make.——</span></p>
<p>——Heaven have mercy upon us both!</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
