<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 21</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-4" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-4-21" epub:type="chapter">
				<h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXI</h2>
				<p>As <i>Francis</i> the first of <i>France</i> was one winterly night warming himself over the embers of a wood fire, and talking with his first minister of sundry things for the good of the state<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-17" id="noteref-17" epub:type="noteref">17</a>⁠—It would not be amiss, said the king, stirring up the embers with his cane, if this good understanding betwixt ourselves and <i>Switzerland</i> was a little strengthened.⁠—There is no end, Sire, replied the minister, in giving money to these people⁠—they would swallow up the treasury of <i>France</i>.⁠—Poo! poo! answered the king⁠—there are more ways, Mons. <i>le Premier</i>, of bribing states, besides that of giving money⁠—I’ll pay <i>Switzerland</i> the honour of standing godfather for my next child.⁠——Your majesty, said the minister, in so doing, would have all the grammarians in <i>Europe</i> upon your back;⁠——<i>Switzerland</i>, as a republick, being a female, can in no construction be godfather.⁠—She may be godmother, replied <i>Francis</i> hastily⁠—so announce my intentions by a courier to-morrow morning.</p>
				<p>I am astonished, said <i>Francis</i> the First, (that day fortnight) speaking to his minister as he entered the closet, that we have had no answer from <i>Switzerland</i>.⁠——Sire, I wait upon you this moment, said Mons. <i>le Premier</i>, to lay before you my dispatches upon that business.⁠—They take it kindly, said the king.⁠—They do, Sire, replied the minister, and have the highest sense of the honour your majesty has done them⁠——but the republick, as godmother, claims her right, in this case, of naming the child.</p>
				<p>In all reason, quoth the king⁠——she will christen him <i>Francis</i>, or <i>Henry</i>, or <i>Lewis</i>, or some name that she knows will be agreeable to us. Your majesty is deceived, replied the minister⁠——I have this hour received a dispatch from our resident, with the determination of the republick on that point also.⁠——And what name has the republick fixed upon for the Dauphin?⁠——<i>Shadrach</i>, <i>Meshech</i>, <i>Abed-nego</i>, replied the minister.⁠—By Saint <i>Peter’s</i> girdle, I will have nothing to do with the <i>Swiss</i>, cried <i>Francis</i> the First, pulling up his breeches and walking hastily across the floor.</p>
				<p>Your majesty, replied the minister calmly, cannot bring yourself off.</p>
				<p>We’ll pay them in money⁠———said the king.</p>
				<p>Sire, there are not sixty thousand crowns in the treasury, answered the minister.⁠——I’ll pawn the best jewel in my crown, quoth <i>Francis</i> the First.</p>
				<p>Your honour stands pawn’d already in this matter, answered Monsieur <i>le Premier</i>.</p>
				<p>Then, Mons. <i>le Premier</i>, said the king, by⁠———we’ll go to war with ’em.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
