<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>III</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-5" id="chapter-5-3" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</h3>
			<p>⸺⸺⁠And a chapter it shall have, and a devil of a one too⁠—so look to yourselves.</p>
			<p>’Tis either <i>Plato</i>, or <i>Plutarch</i>, or <i>Seneca</i>, or <i>Xenophon</i>, or <i>Epictetus</i>, or <i>Theophrastus</i>, or <i>Lucian</i>⁠—or someone perhaps of later date⁠—either <i>Cardan</i>, or <i>Budæus</i>, or <i>Petrarch</i>, or <i>Stella</i>⁠—or possibly it may be some divine or father of the church, <abbr>St.</abbr> <i>Austin</i>, or <abbr>St.</abbr> <i>Cyprian</i>, or <i>Barnard</i>, who affirms that it is an irresistible and natural passion to weep for the loss of our friends or children⁠—and <i>Seneca</i> (I’m positive) tells us somewhere, that such griefs evacuate themselves best by that particular channel⁠—And accordingly we find, that <i>David</i> wept for his son <i>Absalom</i>⁠—<i>Adrian</i> for his <i>Antinous</i>⁠—<i>Niobe</i> for her children, and that <i>Apollodorus</i> and <i>Crito</i> both shed tears for <i>Socrates</i> before his death.</p>
			<p>My father managed his affliction otherwise; and indeed differently from most men either ancient or modern; for he neither wept it away, as the <i>Hebrews</i> and the <i>Romans</i>⁠—or slept it off, as the <i>Laplanders</i>⁠—or hanged it, as the <i>English</i>, or drowned it, as the <i>Germans</i>⁠—nor did he curse it, or damn it, or excommunicate it, or rhyme it, or lillabullero it.⁠⸺⁠</p>
			<p>⸺⁠He got rid of it, however.</p>
			<p>Will your worships give me leave to squeeze in a story between these two pages?</p>
			<p>When <i>Tully</i> was bereft of his dear daughter <i>Tullia</i>, at first he laid it to his heart,⁠—he listened to the voice of nature, and modulated his own unto it.⁠—O my <i>Tullia!</i> my daughter! my child!⁠—still, still, still,⁠—’twas O my <i>Tullia!</i>⁠—my <i>Tullia!</i> Methinks I see my <i>Tullia</i>, I hear my <i>Tullia</i>, I talk with my <i>Tullia</i>.⁠—But as soon as he began to look into the stores of philosophy, and consider how many excellent things might be said upon the occasion⁠—nobody upon earth can conceive, says the great orator, how happy, how joyful it made me.</p>
			<p>My father was as proud of his eloquence as <b>Marcus Tullius Cicero</b> could be for his life, and, for aught I am convinced of to the contrary at present, with as much reason: it was indeed his strength⁠—and his weakness too.⁠⸺⁠His strength⁠—for he was by nature eloquent; and his weakness⁠—for he was hourly a dupe to it; and, provided an occasion in life would but permit him to show his talents, or say either a wise thing, a witty, or a shrewd one⁠—(bating the case of a systematic misfortune)⁠—he had all he wanted.⁠—A blessing which tied up my father’s tongue, and a misfortune which let it loose with a good grace, were pretty equal: sometimes, indeed, the misfortune was the better of the two; for instance, where the pleasure of the harangue was as <em>ten</em>, and the pain of the misfortune but as <em>five</em>⁠—my father gained half in half, and consequently was as well again off, as if it had never befallen him.</p>
			<p>This clue will unravel what otherwise would seem very inconsistent in my father’s domestic character; and it is this, that, in the provocations arising from the neglects and blunders of servants, or other mishaps unavoidable in a family, his anger or rather the duration of it, eternally ran counter to all conjecture.</p>
			<p>My father had a favourite little mare, which he had consigned over to a most beautiful Arabian horse, in order to have a pad out of her for his own riding: he was sanguine in all his projects; so talked about his pad every day with as absolute a security, as if it had been reared, broke,⁠—and bridled and saddled at his door ready for mounting. By some neglect or other in <i>Obadiah</i>, it so fell out, that my father’s expectations were answered with nothing better than a mule, and as ugly a beast of the kind as ever was produced.</p>
			<p>My mother and my uncle <i>Toby</i> expected my father would be the death of <i>Obadiah</i>⁠—and that there never would be an end of the disaster.⁠⸺⁠See here! you rascal, cried my father, pointing to the mule, what you have done!⁠⸺⁠It was not me, said <i>Obadiah</i>.⁠⸺⁠How do I know that? replied my father.</p>
			<p>Triumph swam in my father’s eyes, at the repartee⁠—the <i>Attic</i> salt brought water into them⁠—and so <i>Obadiah</i> heard no more about it.</p>
			<p>Now let us go back to my brother’s death.</p>
			<p>Philosophy has a fine saying for everything.⁠—For <i>Death</i> it has an entire set; the misery was, they all at once rushed into my father’s head, that ’twas difficult to string them together, so as to make anything of a consistent show out of them.⁠—He took them as they came.</p>
			<p>“ ’Tis an inevitable chance⁠—the first statute in <i>Magna Charta</i>⁠—it is an everlasting act of parliament, my dear brother,⁠⸺⁠<em>All must die.</em></p>
			<p>“If my son could not have died, it had been matter of wonder,⁠—not that he is dead.</p>
			<p>“Monarchs and princes dance in the same ring with us.</p>
			<p>“⁠—<em>To die</em>, is the great debt and tribute due unto nature: tombs and monuments, which should perpetuate our memories, pay it themselves; and the proudest pyramid of them all, which wealth and science have erected, has lost its apex, and stands obtruncated in the traveller’s horizon.” (My father found he got great ease, and went on)⁠—“Kingdoms and provinces, and towns and cities, have they not their periods? and when those principles and powers, which at first cemented and put them together, have performed their several evolutions, they fall back.”⁠—Brother <i>Shandy</i>, said my uncle <i>Toby</i>, laying down his pipe at the word <em>evolutions</em>⁠—Revolutions, I meant, quoth my father,⁠—by heaven! I meant revolutions, brother <i>Toby</i>⁠—evolutions is nonsense.⁠⸺’Tis not nonsense,⁠—said my uncle <i>Toby</i>.⁠⸺⁠But is it not nonsense to break the thread of such a discourse upon such an occasion? cried my father⁠—do not⁠—dear <i>Toby</i>, continued he, taking him by the hand, do not⁠—do not, I beseech thee, interrupt me at this crisis.⁠⸺⁠My uncle <i>Toby</i> put his pipe into his mouth.</p>
			<p>“Where is <i>Troy</i> and <i>Mycenæ</i>, and <i>Thebes</i> and <i>Delos</i>, and <i>Persepolis</i> and <i>Agrigentum?</i>”⁠—continued my father, taking up his book of postcards, which he had laid down.⁠—“What is become, brother <i>Toby</i>, of <i>Nineveh</i> and <i>Babylon</i>, of <i>Cizicum</i> and <i>Mitylenæ?</i> The fairest towns that ever the sun rose upon, are now no more; the names only are left, and those (for many of them are wrong spelt) are falling themselves by piece-meals to decay, and in length of time will be forgotten, and involved with everything in a perpetual night: the world itself, brother <i>Toby</i>, must⁠—must come to an end.</p>
			<p>“Returning out of <i>Asia</i>, when I sailed from <i>Ægina</i> towards <i>Megara</i>,” (<i>when can this have been? thought my uncle Toby</i>) “I began to view the country round about. <i>Ægina</i> was behind me, <i>Megara</i> was before, <i>Pyræus</i> on the right hand, <i>Corinth</i> on the left.⁠—What flourishing towns now prostrate upon the earth! Alas! alas! said I to myself, that man should disturb his soul for the loss of a child, when so much as this lies awfully buried in his presence⁠⸺⁠Remember, said I to myself again⁠—remember thou art a man.”⁠—</p>
			<p>Now my uncle <i>Toby</i> knew not that this last paragraph was an extract of <i>Servius Sulpicius’s</i> consolatory letter to <i>Tully</i>.⁠—He had as little skill, honest man, in the fragments, as he had in the whole pieces of antiquity.⁠—And as my father, whilst he was concerned in the <i>Turkey</i> trade, had been three or four different times in the <i>Levant</i>, in one of which he had stayed a whole year and an half at <i>Zant</i>, my uncle <i>Toby</i> naturally concluded, that, in some one of these periods, he had taken a trip across the <i>Archipelago</i> into <i>Asia</i>; and that all this sailing affair with <i>Ægina</i> behind, and <i>Megara</i> before, and <i>Pyræus</i> on the right hand, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, was nothing more than the true course of my father’s voyage and reflections.⁠—’Twas certainly in his <em>manner</em>, and many an undertaking critic would have built two stories higher upon worse foundations.⁠—And pray, brother, quoth my uncle <i>Toby</i>, laying the end of his pipe upon my father’s hand in a kindly way of interruption⁠—but waiting till he finished the account⁠—what year of our Lord was this?⁠—’Twas no year of our Lord, replied my father.⁠—That’s impossible, cried my uncle <i>Toby</i>.⁠—Simpleton! said my father,⁠—’twas forty years before Christ was born.</p>
			<p>My uncle <i>Toby</i> had but two things for it; either to suppose his brother to be the wandering <i>Jew</i>, or that his misfortunes had disordered his brain.⁠—“May the Lord God of heaven and earth protect him and restore him,” said my uncle <i>Toby</i>, praying silently for my father, and with tears in his eyes.</p>
			<p>—My father placed the tears to a proper account, and went on with his harangue with great spirit.</p>
			<p>“There is not such great odds, brother <i>Toby</i>, betwixt good and evil, as the world imagines”⁠⸺(this way of setting off, by the by, was not likely to cure my uncle <i>Toby’s</i> suspicions.)⁠⸺“Labour, sorrow, grief, sickness, want, and woe, are the sauces of life.”⁠—Much good may it do them⁠—said my uncle <i>Toby</i> to himself.⁠⸻</p>
			<p>“My son is dead!⁠—so much the better;⁠—’tis a shame in such a tempest to have but one anchor.”</p>
			<p>“But he is gone forever from us!⁠—be it so. He is got from under the hands of his barber before he was bald⁠—he is but risen from a feast before he was surfeited⁠—from a banquet before he had got drunken.”</p>
			<p>“The <i>Thracians</i> wept when a child was born”⁠—(and we were very near it, quoth my uncle <i>Toby</i>)⁠—“and feasted and made merry when a man went out of the world; and with reason.⁠⸺⁠Death opens the gate of fame, and shuts the gate of envy after it,⁠—it unlooses the chain of the captive, and puts the bondsman’s task into another man’s hands.”</p>
			<p>“Show me the man, who knows what life is, who dreads it, and I’ll show thee a prisoner who dreads his liberty.”</p>
			<p>Is it not better, my dear brother <i>Toby</i>, (for mark⁠—our appetites are but diseases)⁠—is it not better not to hunger at all, than to eat?⁠—not to thirst, than to take physic to cure it?</p>
			<p>Is it not better to be freed from cares and agues, from love and melancholy, and the other hot and cold fits of life, than, like a galled traveller, who comes weary to his inn, to be bound to begin his journey afresh?</p>
			<p>There is no terrour, brother <i>Toby</i>, in its looks, but what it borrows from groans and convulsions⁠—and the blowing of noses and the wiping away of tears with the bottoms of curtains, in a dying man’s room.⁠—Strip it of these, what is it?⁠—’Tis better in battle than in bed, said my uncle <i>Toby</i>.⁠—Take away its herses, its mutes, and its mourning,⁠—its plumes, scutcheons, and other mechanic aids⁠—What is it?⁠⸺⁠<em>Better in battle!</em> continued my father, smiling, for he had absolutely forgot my brother <i>Bobby</i>⁠—’tis terrible no way⁠—for consider, brother <i>Toby</i>,⁠—when we <em>are</em>⁠—death is <em>not</em>;⁠—and when death <em>is</em>⁠—we are <em>not</em>. My uncle <i>Toby</i> laid down his pipe to consider the proposition; my father’s eloquence was too rapid to stay for any man⁠—away it went,⁠—and hurried my uncle <i>Toby’s</i> ideas along with it.⁠⸺⁠</p>
			<p>For this reason, continued my father, ’tis worthy to recollect how little alteration, in great men, the approaches of death have made.⁠—<i>Vespasian</i> died in a jest upon his close-stool⁠—<i>Galba</i> with a sentence⁠—<i>Septimus Severus</i> in a dispatch⁠—<i>Tiberius</i> in dissimulation, and <i>Caesar Augustus</i> in a compliment.⁠—I hope ’twas a sincere one⁠—quoth my uncle <i>Toby</i>.</p>
			<p>—’Twas to his wife,⁠—said my father.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
