<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 39</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-6" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-6-39" epub:type="chapter">
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXIX</h2>
				<p>As <i>Susannah</i> was informed by an express from <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> <i>Bridget</i>, of my uncle <i>Toby’s</i> falling in love with her mistress fifteen days before it happened,⁠—the contents of which express, <i>Susannah</i> communicated to my mother the next day,⁠—it has just given me an opportunity of entering upon my uncle <i>Toby’s</i> amours a fortnight before their existence.</p>
				<p>I have an article of news to tell you, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <i>Shandy</i>, quoth my mother, which will surprise you greatly.⁠⸺⁠</p>
				<p>Now my father was then holding one of his second beds of justice, and was musing within himself about the hardships of matrimony, as my mother broke silence.⁠⸻</p>
				<p>“⁠⸺⁠My brother <i>Toby</i>, quoth she, is going to be married to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> <i>Wadman</i>.”</p>
				<p>⸺⁠Then he will never, quoth my father, be able to lie <em>diagonally</em> in his bed again as long as he lives.</p>
				<p>It was a consuming vexation to my father, that my mother never asked the meaning of a thing she did not understand.</p>
				<p>⸺⁠That she is not a woman of science, my father would say⁠—is her misfortune⁠—but she might ask a question.⁠—</p>
				<p>My mother never did.⁠⸺⁠In short, she went out of the world at last without knowing whether it turned <em>round</em>, or stood <em>still</em>.⁠⸺⁠My father had officiously told her above a thousand times which way it was,⁠—but she always forgot.</p>
				<p>For these reasons, a discourse seldom went on much further betwixt them, than a proposition,⁠—a reply, and a rejoinder; at the end of which, it generally took breath for a few minutes (as in the affair of the breeches), and then went on again.</p>
				<p>If he marries, ’twill be the worse for us,⁠—quoth my mother.</p>
				<p>Not a cherrystone, said my father,⁠—he may as well batter away his means upon that, as anything else.</p>
				<p>⸺⁠To be sure, said my mother: so here ended the proposition,⁠—the reply,⁠—and the rejoinder, I told you of.</p>
				<p>It will be some amusement to him, too,⁠⸺⁠said my father.</p>
				<p>A very great one, answered my mother, if he should have children.⁠⸺⁠</p>
				<p>⸺⁠Lord have mercy upon me,⁠—said my father to himself⁠⸺⁠<span><span>*</span> <span>*</span> <span>*</span> <span>*</span> <span>*</span> <span>*</span> <span>*</span> <span>*</span></span> <span><span>*</span> <span>*</span> <span>*</span> <span>*</span> <span>*</span> <span>*</span> <span>*</span> <span>*</span></span> <span><span>*</span> <span>*</span> <span>*</span> <span>*</span> <span>*</span> <span>*</span> <span>*</span> <span>*</span></span> <span><span>*</span> <span>*</span> <span>*</span> <span>*</span> <span>*</span> <span>*</span></span></p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
