<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter the Nineteenth</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-9" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-9-19b" epub:type="chapter">
				<h2 epub:type="title">Chapter the Nineteenth</h2>
				<p>Now there are such an infinitude of notes, tunes, cants, chants, airs, looks, and accents with which the word <em>fiddlestick</em> may be pronounced in all such causes as this, every one of ’em impressing a sense and meaning as different from the other, as <em>dirt</em> from <em>cleanliness</em>⁠—That Casuists (for it is an affair of conscience on that score) reckon up no less than fourteen thousand in which you may do either right or wrong.</p>
				<p><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> <i>Wadman</i> hit upon the <em>fiddlestick</em>, which summoned up all my uncle <i>Toby’s</i> modest blood into his cheeks⁠—so feeling within himself that he had somehow or other got beyond his depth, he stopped short; and without entering further either into the pains or pleasures of matrimony, he laid his hand upon his heart, and made an offer to take them as they were, and share them along with her.</p>
				<p>When my uncle <i>Toby</i> had said this, he did not care to say it again; so casting his eye upon the Bible which <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> <i>Wadman</i> had laid upon the table, he took it up; and popping, dear soul! upon a passage in it, of all others the most interesting to him⁠—which was the siege of <i>Jericho</i>⁠—he set himself to read it over⁠—leaving his proposal of marriage, as he had done his declaration of love, to work with her after its own way. Now it wrought neither as an astringent or a loosener; nor like opium, or bark, or mercury, or buckthorn, or any one drug which nature had bestowed upon the world⁠—in short, it work’d not at all in her; and the cause of that was, that there was something working there before⁠——Babbler that I am! I have anticipated what it was a dozen times; but there is fire still in the subject⁠——allons.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
