<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 14</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-7" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-7-14" epub:type="chapter">
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIV</h2>
				<p>⸺⁠But she did not know I was under a vow not to shave my beard till I got to <i>Paris</i>;⁠⸺⁠yet I hate to make mysteries of nothing;⁠⸺’tis the cold cautiousness of one of those little souls from which <i>Lessius</i> (<i xml:lang="la"><abbr>lib.</abbr></i> 13, <i xml:lang="la">de moribus divinis, <abbr>cap.</abbr></i> 24) hath made his estimate, wherein he setteth forth, That one <i>Dutch</i> mile, cubically multiplied, will allow room enough, and to spare, for eight hundred thousand millions, which he supposes to be as great a number of souls (counting from the fall of <i>Adam</i>) as can possibly be damn’d to the end of the world.</p>
				<p>From what he has made this second estimate⁠⸺⁠unless from the parental goodness of God⁠—I don’t know⁠—I am much more at a loss what could be in <i>Franciscus Ribbera’s</i> head, who pretends that no less a space than one of two hundred <i>Italian</i> miles multiplied into itself, will be sufficient to hold the like number⁠⸺⁠he certainly must have gone upon some of the old <i>Roman</i> souls, of which he had read, without reflecting how much, by a gradual and most tabid decline, in the course of eighteen hundred years, they must unavoidably have shrunk so as to have come, when he wrote, almost to nothing.</p>
				<p>In <i>Lessius’s</i> time, who seems the cooler man, they were as little as can be imagined⁠⸺⁠</p>
				<p>⸺⁠We find them less <em>now</em>⁠⸺⁠</p>
				<p>And next winter we shall find them less again; so that if we go on from little to less, and from less to nothing, I hesitate not one moment to affirm, that in half a century, at this rate, we shall have no souls at all; which being the period beyond which I doubt likewise of the existence of the Christian faith, ’twill be one advantage that both of ’em will be exactly worn out together.</p>
				<p>Blessed <i>Jupiter!</i> and blessed every other heathen god and goddess! for now ye will all come into play again, and with <i>Priapus</i> at your tails⁠⸺⁠what jovial times!⁠⸺⁠but where am I? and into what a delicious riot of things am I rushing? I⁠⸺⁠I who must be cut short in the midst of my days, and taste no more of ’em than what I borrow from my imagination⁠⸺⁠peace to thee, generous fool! and let me go on.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
