<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 15</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-4" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-4-15" epub:type="chapter">
				<h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XV</h2>
				<p>I wish I could write a chapter upon sleep.</p>
				<p>A fitter occasion could never have presented itself, than what this moment offers, when all the curtains of the family are drawn⁠—the candles put out⁠—and no creature’s eyes are open but a single one, for the other has been shut these twenty years, of my mother’s nurse.</p>
				<p>It is a fine subject!</p>
				<p>And yet, as fine as it is, I would undertake to write a dozen chapters upon buttonholes, both quicker and with more fame, than a single chapter upon this.</p>
				<p>Buttonholes! there is something lively in the very idea of ’em⁠⸺and trust me, when I get amongst ’em⁠⸺You gentry with great beards⁠⸺look as grave as you will⁠⸻I’ll make merry work with my buttonholes⁠—I shall have ’em all to myself⁠—’tis a maiden subject⁠—I shall run foul of no man’s wisdom or fine sayings in it.</p>
				<p>But for sleep⁠⸺I know I shall make nothing of it before I begin⁠—I am no dab at your fine sayings in the first place⁠—and in the next, I cannot for my soul set a grave face upon a bad matter, and tell the world⁠—’tis the refuge of the unfortunate⁠—the enfranchisement of the prisoner⁠—the downy lap of the hopeless, the weary, and the brokenhearted; nor could I set out with a lye in my mouth, by affirming, that of all the soft and delicious functions of our nature, by which the great Author of it, in his bounty, has been pleased to recompense the sufferings wherewith his justice and his good pleasure has wearied us⁠⸺that this is the chiefest (I know pleasures worth ten of it); or what a happiness it is to man, when the anxieties and passions of the day are over, and he lies down upon his back, that his soul shall be so seated within him, that whichever way she turns her eyes, the heavens shall look calm and sweet above her⁠—no desire⁠—or fear⁠—or doubt that troubles the air, nor any difficulty past, present, or to come, that the imagination may not pass over without offence, in that sweet secession.</p>
				<p>“God’s blessing,” said <i>Sancho Pança</i>, “be upon the man who first invented this selfsame thing called sleep⁠—it covers a man all over like a cloak.” Now there is more to me in this, and it speaks warmer to my heart and affections, than all the dissertations squeez’d out of the heads of the learned together upon the subject.</p>
				<p>—Not that I altogether disapprove of what <i>Montaigne</i> advances upon it⁠—’tis admirable in its way⁠—(I quote by memory).</p>
				<p>The world enjoys other pleasures, says he, as they do that of sleep, without tasting or feeling it as it slips and passes by.⁠—We should study and ruminate upon it, in order to render proper thanks to him who grants it to us.⁠—For this end I cause myself to be disturbed in my sleep, that I may the better and more sensibly relish it.⁠⸺And yet I see few, says he again, who live with less sleep, when need requires; my body is capable of a firm, but not of a violent and sudden agitation⁠—I evade of late all violent exercises⁠⸺I am never weary with walking⁠⸺but from my youth, I never liked to ride upon pavements. I love to lie hard and alone, and even without my wife⁠⸺This last word may stagger the faith of the world⁠⸺but remember, “<i xml:lang="fr">La Vraisemblance</i> (as <i>Bayle</i> says in the affair of <i>Liceti</i>) <i xml:lang="fr">n’est pas toujours du Côté de la Verité</i>.” And so much for sleep.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
