<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>VIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-2" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-2-8" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</h3>
				<p>It is about an hour and a half’s tolerable good reading since my uncle <i>Toby</i> rung the bell, when <i>Obadiah</i> was ordered to saddle a horse, and go for <abbr>Dr.</abbr> <i>Slop</i>, the man-midwife;⁠—so that no one can say, with reason, that I have not allowed <i>Obadiah</i> time enough, poetically speaking, and considering the emergency too, both to go and come;⁠⸺⁠though, morally and truly speaking, the man perhaps has scarce had time to get on his boots.</p>
				<p>If the hypercritick will go upon this; and is resolved after all to take a pendulum, and measure the true distance betwixt the ringing of the bell, and the rap at the door;⁠—and, after finding it to be no more than two minutes, thirteen seconds, and three fifths,⁠—should take upon him to insult over me for such a breach in the unity, or rather probability of time;⁠—I would remind him, that the idea of duration, and of its simple modes, is got merely from the train and succession of our ideas,⁠⸺⁠and is the true scholastic pendulum,⁠⸺⁠and by which, as a scholar, I will be tried in this matter,⁠—abjuring and detesting the jurisdiction of all other pendulums whatever.</p>
				<p>I would therefore desire him to consider that it is but poor eight miles from <i>Shandy-Hall</i> to <abbr>Dr.</abbr> <i>Slop</i>, the man-midwife’s house;⁠—and that whilst <i>Obadiah</i> has been going those said miles and back, I have brought my uncle <i>Toby</i> from <i>Namur</i>, quite across all <i>Flanders</i>, into <i>England</i>:⁠—That I have had him ill upon my hands near four years;⁠—and have since travelled him and Corporal <i>Trim</i> in a chariot-and-four, a journey of near two hundred miles down into <i>Yorkshire</i>,⁠⸺⁠all which put together, must have prepared the reader’s imagination for the entrance of <abbr>Dr.</abbr> <i>Slop</i> upon the stage,⁠—as much, at least (I hope) as a dance, a song, or a concerto between the acts.</p>
				<p>If my hypercritick is intractable, alledging, that two minutes and thirteen seconds are no more than two minutes and thirteen seconds,⁠—when I have said all I can about them; and that this plea, though it might save me dramatically, will damn me biographically, rendering my book from this very moment, a professed <b>Romance</b>, which, before, was a book apocryphal:⁠⸺⁠If I am thus pressed⁠—I then put an end to the whole objection and controversy about it all at once,⁠⸺⁠by acquainting him, that <i>Obadiah</i> had not got above threescore yards from the stable-yard before he met with <abbr>Dr.</abbr> <i>Slop</i>;⁠—and indeed he gave a dirty proof that he had met with him, and was within an ace of giving a tragical one too.</p>
				<p>Imagine to yourself;⁠—but this had better begin a new chapter.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
