<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 27</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-7" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-7-27" epub:type="chapter">
				<h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXVII</h2>
<p>——All you need say of <i>Fontainbleau</i> (in case you
are ask’d) is, that it stands about forty miles (south <i>something</i>)
from <i>Paris</i>, in the middle of a large forest——That
there is something great in it——That the king goes there
once every two or three years,
with his whole court, for the pleasure of the chase—and that,
during that carnival of sporting, any <i>English</i> gentleman of
fashion (you need not forget yourself) may be accommodated with a nag or
two, to partake of the sport, taking care only not to out-gallop the
<span class="locked">king——</span></p>
<p>Though there are two reasons why you need not talk loud of this to
every one.</p>
<p>First, Because ’twill make the said nags the harder to be got;
and</p>
<p>Secondly, ’Tis not a word of it true.——<i>Allons!</i></p>
<p>As for <span class="smallcaps">Sens</span>——you may
dispatch—in a word———“<i>’Tis an archiepiscopal
see</i>.”</p>
<p>——For <span class="smallcaps">Joigny</span>—the
less, I think, one says of it the better.</p>
<p>But for <span class="smallcaps">Auxerre</span>—I could go on
for ever: for in my <i>grand tour</i> through <i>Europe</i>, in which,
after all, my father (not caring to trust me with any one) attended me
himself, with my uncle <i>Toby</i>, and <i>Trim</i>, and <i>Obadiah</i>,
and indeed most of the family, except my mother, who being taken up with
a project of knitting my father a pair of large worsted
breeches—(the thing is common sense)—and she not caring to
be put out of her way, she staid at home, at <span class="smallcaps">Shandy Hall</span>, to keep things right during the
expedition; in which, I say, my father stopping us two days at
<i>Auxerre</i>, and his researches being ever of such a nature, that
they would have found fruit even in a desert——he has left me
enough to say upon <span class="smallcaps">Auxerre</span>: in short,
wherever my father went——but ’twas more remarkably so, in
this journey through <i>France</i> and <i>Italy</i>, than in any other
stages of his life——his road seemed to lie so much on one
side of that, wherein all other travellers have gone before him—he
saw kings and courts and silks of all colours, in such strange
lights——and his remarks and reasonings upon the characters,
the manners, and customs, of the countries we pass’d over, were so
opposite to those of all other mortal men, particularly those of my
uncle <i>Toby</i> and <i>Trim</i>—(to say nothing of
myself)—and to crown all—the occurrences and scrapes which
we were perpetually meeting and getting into, in consequence of his
systems and opiniatry—they were of so odd, so mix’d and
tragi-comical a contexture—That the whole put together, it appears
of so different a shade and tint from any tour of <i>Europe</i>, which
was ever executed—that I will venture to pronounce—the fault
must be mine and mine only—if it be not read by all travellers and
travel-readers, till travelling is no more,—or which comes to the
same point—till the world, finally, takes it into its head to
stand <span class="locked">still.——</span></p>
<p>——But this rich bale is not to be open’d now; except a
small thread or two of it, merely to unravel the mystery of my father’s
stay at <span class="smallcaps">Auxerre</span>.</p>
<p>——As I have mentioned it—’tis too slight to be kept
suspended; and when ’tis wove in, there is an end of it.</p>
<p>We’ll go, brother <i>Toby</i>, said my father, whilst dinner is
coddling—to the abby of Saint <i>Germain</i>, if it be only to see
these bodies, of which Monsieur <i>Sequier</i> has given such a
recommendation.——I’ll go see any body, quoth my uncle
<i>Toby</i>; for he was all compliance through every step of the
journey——Defend me! said my father—they are all
mummies——Then one need not shave; quoth my uncle
<i>Toby</i>——Shave! no—cried my father—’twill be
more like relations to go with our beards on—So out we sallied,
the corporal lending his master his arm, and bringing up the rear, to
the abby of Saint <i>Germain</i>.</p>
<p>Everything is very fine, and very rich, and very superb, and very
magnificent, said my father, addressing himself to the sacristan, who
was a younger brother of the order of <i>Benedictines</i>—but our
curiosity has led us to see the bodies, of which Monsieur <i>Sequier</i>
has given the world so exact a description.—The sacristan made a
bow, and lighting a torch first, which he had always in the vestry ready
for the purpose; he led us into the tomb of St.
<i>Heribald</i>——This, said the sacristan, laying his hand
upon the tomb, was a renowned prince of the house of <i>Bavaria</i>, who
under the successive reigns of <i>Charlemagne</i>, <i>Louis le
Debonnair</i>, and <i>Charles the Bald</i>, bore a great sway in the
government, and had a principal hand in bringing everything into order
and <span class="locked">discipline——</span></p>
<p>Then he has been as great, said my uncle, in the field, as in the
cabinet——I dare say he has been a gallant
soldier——He was a monk—said the sacristan.</p>
<p>My uncle <i>Toby</i> and <i>Trim</i> sought comfort in each other’s
faces—but found it not: my father clapped both his hands upon his
cod-piece, which was a way he had when anything hugely tickled him: for
though he hated a monk and the very smell of a monk worse than all the
devils in hell——yet the shot hitting my uncle <i>Toby</i>
and <i>Trim</i> so much harder than him, ’twas a relative triumph; and
put him into the gayest humour in the world.</p>
<p>——And pray what do you call this gentleman? quoth my
father, rather sportingly: This tomb, said the young <i>Benedictine</i>,
looking downwards, contains the bones of Saint <span class="smallcaps">Maxima</span>, who came from <i>Ravenna</i> on purpose to
touch the <span class="locked">body——</span></p>
<p>——Of Saint <span class="smallcaps">Maximus</span>, said
my father, popping in with his saint before him,—they were two of
the greatest saints in the whole martyrology, added my
father——Excuse me, said the
sacristan————’twas to touch the bones of Saint
<i>Germain</i>, the builder of the abby——And what did she
get by it? said my uncle <i>Toby</i>——What does any woman
get by it? said my father——<span class="smallcaps">Martyrdome</span>; replied the young <i>Benedictine</i>,
making a bow down to the ground, and uttering the word with so humble
but decisive a cadence, it disarmed my father for a moment. ’Tis
supposed, continued the <i>Benedictine</i>, that St. <i>Maxima</i> has
lain in this tomb four hundred years, and two hundred before her
canonization——’Tis but a slow rise, brother <i>Toby</i>,
quoth my father, in this self-same army of
martyrs.——A desperate slow one, an’ please your honour,
said <i>Trim</i>, unless one could purchase——I should
rather sell out entirely, quoth my uncle
<i>Toby</i>——I am pretty much of your opinion, brother
<i>Toby</i>, said my father.</p>
<p>——Poor St. <i>Maxima!</i> said my uncle <i>Toby</i> low
to himself, as we turn’d from her tomb: She was one of the fairest and
most beautiful ladies either of <i>Italy</i> or <i>France</i>, continued
the sacristan——But who the duce has got lain down here,
besides her? quoth my father, pointing with his cane to a large tomb as
we walked on——It is Saint <i>Optat</i>, Sir, answered the
sacristan——And properly is Saint <i>Optat</i> plac’d! said
my father: And what is Saint <i>Optat’s</i> story? continued he. Saint
<i>Optat</i>, replied the sacristan, was a <span class="locked">bishop——</span></p>
<p>——I thought so, by heaven! cried my father, interrupting
him——Saint <i>Optat!</i>——how should Saint
<i>Optat</i> fail? so snatching out his pocket-book, and the young
<i>Benedictine</i> holding him the torch as he wrote, he set it down as
a new prop to his system of Christian names, and I will be bold to say,
so disinterested was he in the search of truth, that had he found a
treasure in Saint <i>Optat’s</i> tomb, it would not have made him half
so rich: ’Twas as successful a short visit as ever was paid to the dead;
and so highly was his fancy pleas’d with all that had passed in
it,—that he determined at once to stay another day in
<i>Auxerre</i>.</p>
<p>—I’ll see the rest of these good gentry <ins class="correction" title=", missing">to-morrow,</ins> said my father, as we
cross’d over the square—And while you are paying that visit,
brother <i>Shandy</i>, quoth my uncle <i>Toby</i>—the corporal and
I will mount the ramparts.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
