<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>III</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-6" id="chapter-6-3" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</h3>
			<p>When the cataplasm was ready, a scruple of <em>decorum</em> had unseasonably rose up in <i>Susannah’s</i> conscience about holding the candle, whilst <i>Slop</i> tied it on; <i>Slop</i> had not treated <i>Susannah’s</i> distemper with anodynes,⁠—and so a quarrel had ensued betwixt them.</p>
			<p>⸺⁠Oh! oh!⁠⸺⁠said <i>Slop</i>, casting a glance of undue freedom in <i>Susannah’s</i> face, as she declined the office;⁠⸺⁠then, I think I know you, madam⁠⸺⁠You know me, Sir! cried <i>Susannah</i> fastidiously, and with a toss of her head, levelled evidently, not at his profession, but at the doctor himself,⁠⸺⁠you know me! cried <i>Susannah</i> again.⁠⸺⁠Doctor <i>Slop</i> clapped his finger and his thumb instantly upon his nostrils;⁠⸺⁠<i>Susannah’s</i> spleen was ready to burst at it;⁠⸺’Tis false, said <i>Susannah</i>.⁠—Come, come, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Modesty, said <i>Slop</i>, not a little elated with the success of his last thrust,⁠⸺⁠If you won’t hold the candle, and look⁠—you may hold it and shut your eyes:⁠—That’s one of your popish shifts, cried <i>Susannah</i>:⁠—’Tis better, said <i>Slop</i>, with a nod, than no shift at all, young woman;⁠⸺⁠I defy you, Sir, cried <i>Susannah</i>, pulling her shift sleeve below her elbow.</p>
			<p>It was almost impossible for two persons to assist each other in a surgical case with a more splenetic cordiality.</p>
			<p><i>Slop</i> snatched up the cataplasm,⁠⸺⁠<i>Susannah</i> snatched up the candle;⁠⸺⁠a little this way, said <i>Slop</i>; <i>Susannah</i> looking one way, and rowing another, instantly set fire to <i>Slop’s</i> wig, which being somewhat bushy and unctuous withal, was burnt out before it was well kindled.⁠⸻You impudent whore! cried <i>Slop</i>,⁠—(for what is passion, but a wild beast?)⁠—you impudent whore, cried <i>Slop</i>, getting upright, with the cataplasm in his hand;⁠⸺⁠I never was the destruction of anybody’s nose, said <i>Susannah</i>,⁠—which is more than you can say:⁠⸺⁠Is it? cried <i>Slop</i>, throwing the cataplasm in her face;⁠⸺⁠Yes, it is, cried <i>Susannah</i>, returning the compliment with what was left in the pan.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
