<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-4" id="chapter-4-12" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XII</h3>
			<p>—And how does your mistress? cried my father, taking the same step over again from the landing, and calling to <i>Susannah</i>, whom he saw passing by the foot of the stairs with a huge pincushion in her hand⁠—how does your mistress? As well, said <i>Susannah</i>, tripping by, but without looking up, as can be expected.⁠—What a fool am I! said my father, drawing his leg back again⁠—let things be as they will, brother <i>Toby</i>, ’tis ever the precise answer⁠⸺⁠And how is the child, pray?⁠⸺⁠No answer. And where is <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> <i>Slop?</i> added my father, raising his voice aloud, and looking over the ballusters⁠—<i>Susannah</i> was out of hearing.</p>
			<p>Of all the riddles of a married life, said my father, crossing the landing in order to set his back against the wall, whilst he propounded it to my uncle <i>Toby</i>⁠⸺⁠of all the puzzling riddles, said he, in a marriage state,⁠⸺⁠of which you may trust me, brother <i>Toby</i>, there are more asses loads than all <i>Job’s</i> stock of asses could have carried⁠⸺⁠there is not one that has more intricacies in it than this⁠—that from the very moment the mistress of the house is brought to bed, every female in it, from my lady’s gentlewoman down to the cinder-wench, becomes an inch taller for it; and give themselves more airs upon that single inch, than all their other inches put together.</p>
			<p>I think rather, replied my uncle <i>Toby</i>, that ’tis we who sink an inch lower.⁠—If I meet but a woman with child⁠—I do it.⁠—’Tis a heavy tax upon that half of our fellow-creatures, brother <i>Shandy</i>, said my uncle <i>Toby</i>⁠—’Tis a piteous burden upon ’em, continued he, shaking his head⁠—Yes, yes, ’tis a painful thing⁠—said my father, shaking his head too⁠⸺⁠but certainly since shaking of heads came into fashion, never did two heads shake together, in concert, from two such different springs.</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<span>God bless</span>
					<span>Deuce take</span>
				</span>
				<span>}</span>
				<span>’em all⁠⸻said my uncle <i>Toby</i> and my father, each to himself.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
