<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 1</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-5" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-5-1" epub:type="chapter">
				<h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">I</h2>
				<p>If it had not been for those two mettlesome tits, and that madcap of a postillion who drove them from Stilton to Stamford, the thought had never entered my head. He flew like lightning⁠——there was a slope of three miles and a half⁠——we scarce touched the ground⁠——the motion was most rapid⁠——most impetuous⁠———’twas communicated to my brain⁠—my heart partook of it⁠——“By the great God of day,” said I, looking towards the sun, and thrusting my arm out of the fore-window of the chaise, as I made my vow, “I will lock up my study-door the moment I get home, and throw the key of it ninety feet below the surface of the earth, into the draw-well at the back of my house.”</p>
				<p>The London wagon confirmed me in my resolution; it hung tottering upon the hill, scarce progressive, drag’d⁠—drag’d up by eight <em>heavy beasts</em>⁠—“by main strength!⁠——quoth I, nodding⁠——but your betters draw the same way⁠——and something of everybody’s!⁠——O rare!”</p>
				<p>Tell me, ye learned, shall we for ever be adding so much to the <em>bulk</em>⁠—so little to the <em>stock?</em></p>
				<p>Shall we for ever make new books, as apothecaries make new mixtures, by pouring only out of one vessel into another?</p>
				<p>Are we for ever to be twisting, and untwisting the same rope? for ever in the same track⁠—for ever at the same pace?</p>
				<p>Shall we be destined to the days of eternity, on holy-days, as well as working-days, to be showing the <em>relicks of learning</em>, as monks do the relicks of their saints⁠—without working one⁠—one single miracle with them?</p>
				<p>Who made Man, with powers which dart him from earth to heaven in a moment⁠—that great, that most excellent, and most noble creature of the world⁠—the <em>miracle</em> of nature, as Zoroaster in his book <span xml:lang="el">περι φύσεως</span> called him⁠—the <b>Shekinah</b> of the divine presence, as Chrysostom⁠——the <em>image</em> of God, as Moses⁠——the <em>ray</em> of divinity, as Plato⁠—the <em>marvel</em> of <em>marvels</em>, as Aristotle⁠—to go sneaking on at this pitiful⁠—pimping⁠—pettifogging rate?</p>
				<p>I scorn to be as abusive as Horace upon the occasion⁠———but if there is no catachresis in the wish, and no sin in it, I wish from my soul, that every imitator in <i>Great Britain</i>, <i>France</i>, and <i>Ireland</i>, had the farcy for his pains; and that there was a good farcical house, large enough to hold⁠—aye⁠—and sublimate them, <em>shag rag and bobtail</em>, male and female, all together: and this leads me to the affair of <i>Whiskers</i>⁠——but, by what chain of ideas⁠—I leave as a legacy in <i xml:lang="fr">mortmain</i> to Prudes and Tartufs, to enjoy and make the most of.</p>
				<section id="chapter-5-1-upon-whiskers" epub:type="subchapter">
					<h3 epub:type="title">Upon Whiskers</h3>
					<p>I’m sorry I made it⁠——’twas as inconsiderate a promise as ever entered a man’s head⁠——A chapter upon whiskers! alas! the world will not bear it⁠—’tis a delicate world⁠——but I knew not of what mettle it was made⁠—nor had I ever seen the underwritten fragment; otherwise, as surely as noses are noses, and whiskers are whiskers still (let the world say what it will to the contrary); so surely would I have steered clear of this dangerous chapter.</p>
				</section>
				<section id="chapter-5-1-the-fragment" epub:type="subchapter">
					<h3 epub:type="title">The Fragment</h3>
					<p><span><span>*</span> <span>*</span> <span>*</span> <span>*</span> <span>*</span> <span>*</span> <span>*</span> <span>*</span> <span>*</span> <span>*</span></span> <span><span>*</span> <span>*</span> <span>*</span> <span>*</span> <span>*</span> <span>*</span> <span>*</span> <span>*</span> <span>*</span> <span>*</span></span>⁠———You are half asleep, my good lady, said the old gentleman, taking hold of the old lady’s hand, and giving it a gentle squeeze, as he pronounced the word <i>Whiskers</i>⁠——shall we change the subject? By no means, replied the old lady⁠—I like your account of those matters; so throwing a thin gauze handkerchief over her head, and leaning it back upon the chair with her face turned towards him, and advancing her two feet as she reclined herself⁠——I desire, continued she, you will go on.</p>
					<p>The old gentleman went on as follows:⁠———Whiskers! cried the queen of <i>Navarre</i>, dropping her knotting ball, as <i>La Fosseuse</i> uttered the word⁠——Whiskers, madam, said <i>La Fosseuse</i>, pinning the ball to the queen’s apron, and making a courtesy as she repeated it.</p>
					<p><i>La Fosseuse’s</i> voice was naturally soft and low, yet ’twas an articulate voice: and every letter of the word <i>Whiskers</i> fell distinctly upon the queen of <i>Navarre’s</i> ear⁠—Whiskers! cried the queen, laying a greater stress upon the word, and as if she had still distrusted her ears⁠——Whiskers! replied <i>La Fosseuse</i>, repeating the word a third time⁠——There is not a cavalier, madam, of his age in <i>Navarre</i>, continued the maid of honour, pressing the page’s interest upon the queen, that has so gallant a pair⁠——Of what? cried <i>Margaret</i>, smiling⁠—Of whiskers, said <i>La Fosseuse</i>, with infinite modesty.</p>
					<p>The word <i>Whiskers</i> still stood its ground, and continued to be made use of in most of the best companies throughout the little kingdom of <i>Navarre</i>, notwithstanding the indiscreet use which <i>La Fosseuse</i> had made of it: the truth was, <i>La Fosseuse</i> had pronounced the word, not only before the queen, but upon sundry other occasions at court, with an accent which always implied something of a mystery⁠—And as the court of <i>Margaret</i>, as all the world knows, was at that time a mixture of gallantry and devotion⁠——and whiskers being as applicable to the one, as the other, the word naturally stood its ground⁠——it gain’d full as much as it lost; that is, the clergy were for it⁠——the laity were against it⁠——and for the women,⁠——<em>they</em> were divided.</p>
					<p>The excellency of the figure and mien of the young Sieur <i>De Croix</i>, was at that time beginning to draw the attention of the maids of honour towards the terrace before the palace gate, where the guard was mounted. The lady <i>De Baussiere</i> fell deeply in love with him,⁠——<i>La Battarelle</i> did the same⁠—it was the finest weather for it, that ever was remembered in <i>Navarre</i>⁠——<i>La Guyol</i>, <i>La Maronette</i>, <i>La Sabatiere</i>, fell in love with the Sieur <i>De Croix</i> also⁠——<i>La Rebours</i> and <i>La Fosseuse</i> knew better⁠——<i>De Croix</i> had failed in an attempt to recommend himself to <i>La Rebours</i>; and <i>La Rebours</i> and <i>La Fosseuse</i> were inseparable.</p>
					<p>The queen of <i>Navarre</i> was sitting with her ladies in the painted bow-window, facing the gate of the second court, as <i>De Croix</i> passed through it⁠—He is handsome, said the Lady <i>Baussiere</i>.⁠——He has a good mien, said <i>La Battarelle</i>⁠——He is finely shaped, said <i>La Guyol</i>⁠—I never saw an officer of the horse-guards in my life, said <i>La Maronette</i>, with two such legs⁠——Or who stood so well upon them, said <i>La Sabatiere</i>⁠———But he has no whiskers, cried <i>La Fosseuse</i>⁠——Not a pile, said <i>La Rebours</i>.</p>
					<p>The queen went directly to her oratory, musing all the way, as she walked through the gallery, upon the subject; turning it this way and that way in her fancy⁠—<i xml:lang="la">Ave Maria!</i>⁠———what can <i>La Fosseuse</i> mean? said she, kneeling down upon the cushion.</p>
					<p><i>La Guyol</i>, <i>La Battarelle</i>, <i>La Maronette</i>, <i>La Sabatiere</i>, retired instantly to their chambers⁠———Whiskers! said all four of them to themselves, as they bolted their doors on the inside.</p>
					<p>The Lady <i>Carnavallette</i> was counting her beads with both hands, unsuspected, under her farthingal⁠——from <abbr>St.</abbr> <i>Antony</i> down to <abbr>St.</abbr> <i>Ursula</i> inclusive, not a saint passed through her fingers without whiskers; <abbr>St.</abbr> <i>Francis</i>, <abbr>St.</abbr> <i>Dominick</i>, <abbr>St.</abbr> <i>Bennet</i>, <abbr>St.</abbr> <i>Basil</i>, <abbr>St.</abbr> <i>Bridget</i>, had all whiskers.</p>
					<p>The Lady <i>Baussiere</i> had got into a wilderness of conceits, with moralizing too intricately upon <i>La Fosseuse’s</i> text⁠——She mounted her palfrey, her page followed her⁠——the host passed by⁠—the Lady <i>Baussiere</i> rode on.</p>
					<p>One denier, cried the order of mercy⁠—one single denier, in behalf of a thousand patient captives, whose eyes look towards heaven and you for their redemption.</p>
					<p>——The Lady <i>Baussiere</i> rode on.</p>
					<p>Pity the unhappy, said a devout, venerable, hoary-headed man, meekly holding up a box, begirt with iron, in his withered hands⁠——I beg for the unfortunate⁠—good my Lady, ’tis for a prison⁠—for an hospital⁠—’tis for an old man⁠—a poor man undone by shipwreck, by suretyship, by fire⁠——I call God and all his angels to witness⁠——’tis to clothe the naked⁠——to feed the hungry⁠——’tis to comfort the sick and the brokenhearted.</p>
					<p>The Lady <i>Baussiere</i> rode on.</p>
					<p>A decayed kinsman bowed himself to the ground.</p>
					<p>——The Lady <i>Baussiere</i> rode on.</p>
					<p>He ran begging bareheaded on one side of her palfrey, conjuring her by the former bonds of friendship, alliance, consanguinity, <abbr>etc.</abbr>⁠——Cousin, aunt, sister, mother,⁠——for virtue’s sake, for your own, for mine, for Christ’s sake, remember me⁠——pity me.</p>
					<p>——The Lady <i>Baussiere</i> rode on.</p>
					<p>Take hold of my whiskers, said the Lady <i>Baussiere</i>⁠——The page took hold of her palfrey. She dismounted at the end of the terrace.</p>
					<p>There are some trains of certain ideas which leave prints of themselves about our eyes and eyebrows; and there is a consciousness of it, somewhere about the heart, which serves but to make these etchings the stronger⁠—we see, spell, and put them together without a dictionary.</p>
					<p>Ha, ha! he, hee! cried <i>La Guyol</i> and <i>La Sabatiere</i>, looking close at each other’s prints⁠——Ho, ho! cried <i>La Battarelle</i> and <i>Maronette</i>, doing the same:⁠—Whist! cried one⁠—st, st,⁠—said a second⁠—hush, quoth a third⁠—poo, poo, replied a fourth⁠—gramercy! cried the Lady <i>Carnavallette</i>;⁠——’twas she who bewhisker’d <abbr>St.</abbr> <i>Bridget</i>.</p>
					<p><i>La Fosseuse</i> drew her bodkin from the knot of her hair, and having traced the outline of a small whisker, with the blunt end of it, upon one side of her upper lip, put it into <i>La Rebours’</i> hand⁠—<i>La Rebours</i> shook her head.</p>
					<p>The Lady <i>Baussiere</i> coughed thrice into the inside of her muff⁠—<i>La Guyol</i> smiled⁠—Fy, said the Lady <i>Baussiere</i>. The queen of <i>Navarre</i> touched her eye with the tip of her forefinger⁠—as much as to say, I understand you all.</p>
					<p>’Twas plain to the whole court the word was ruined: <i>La Fosseuse</i> had given it a wound, and it was not the better for passing through all these defiles⁠——It made a faint stand, however, for a few months, by the expiration of which, the Sieur <i>De Croix</i>, finding it high time to leave <i>Navarre</i> for want of whiskers⁠——the word in course became indecent, and (after a few efforts) absolutely unfit for use.</p>
					<p>The best word, in the best language of the best world, must have suffered under such combinations.⁠———The curate of <i>d’Estella</i> wrote a book against them, setting forth the dangers of accessory ideas, and warning the <i>Navarois</i> against them.</p>
					<p>Does not all the world know, said the curate <i>d’Estella</i> at the conclusion of his work, that Noses ran the same fate some centuries ago in most parts of <i>Europe</i>, which Whiskers have now done in the kingdom of <i>Navarre?</i>⁠—The evil indeed spread no farther then⁠—but have not beds and bolsters, and nightcaps and chamberpots stood upon the brink of destruction ever since? Are not trouse, and placket-holes, and pump-handles⁠—and spigots and faucets, in danger still from the same association?⁠——Chastity, by nature, the gentlest of all affections⁠—give it but its head⁠——’tis like a ramping and a roaring lion.</p>
					<p>The drift of the curate <i>d’Estella’s</i> argument was not understood.⁠—They ran the scent the wrong way.⁠—The world bridled his ass at the tail.⁠—And when the <em>extremes</em> of <b>delicacy</b>, and the <em>beginnings</em> of <b>concupiscence</b>, hold their next provincial chapter together, they may decree that bawdy also.</p>
				</section>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
