<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 15</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-2" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-2-15" epub:type="chapter">
				<h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XV</h2>
<p><span class="firstword">In</span> popped Corporal <i>Trim</i> with
<i>Stevinus</i>:—But ’twas too late,—all the discourse had
been exhausted without him, and was running into a new
channel.—You may take the book home again, <i>Trim</i>, said my
uncle <i>Toby</i>, nodding to him.</p>
<p>But prithee, Corporal, quoth my father, drolling,—look first
into it, and see if thou canst spy aught of a sailing chariot
in it.</p>
<p>Corporal <i>Trim</i>, by being in the service, had learned to
obey,—and not to remonstrate;—so taking the book to a
side-table, and running over the leaves; An’ please your Honour, said
<i>Trim</i>, I can see no such thing;—however, continued the
Corporal, drolling a little in his turn, I’ll make sure work of it, an’
please your Honour;—so taking hold of the two covers of the book,
one in each hand, and letting the leaves fall down, as he bent the
covers back, he gave the book a good sound shake.</p>
<p>There is something falling out, however, said <i>Trim</i>, an’ please
your Honour;—but it is not a chariot, or anything like
one:—Prithee, Corporal, said my father, smiling, what is it
then?—I think, answered <i>Trim</i>, stooping to take it
up,——’tis more like a sermon,———for it
begins with a text of scripture, and the chapter and verse;—and
then goes on, not as a chariot, but like a sermon directly.</p>
<p>The company smiled.</p>
<p>I cannot conceive how it is possible, quoth my uncle <i>Toby</i>, for
such a thing as a sermon to have got into my <i>Stevinus</i>.</p>
<p>I think ’tis a sermon, replied <i>Trim</i>;—but if it please
your Honours, as it is a fair hand, I will read you a
page;—for <i>Trim</i>, you must know, loved to hear himself read
almost as well as talk.</p>
<span class="pagenum">
<a id="page87" name="page87">87</a></span>
<p>I have ever a strong propensity, said my father, to look into things
which cross my way, by such strange fatalities as these;—and as we
have nothing better to do, at least till <i>Obadiah</i> gets back,
I shall be obliged to you, brother, if Dr. <i>Slop</i> has no
objection to it, to order the Corporal to give us a page or two of
it,—if he is as able to do it, as he seems willing. An’ please
your Honour, quoth <i>Trim</i>, I officiated two whole campaigns,
in <i>Flanders</i>, as clerk to the chaplain of the
regiment.——He can read it, quoth my uncle <i>Toby</i>, as
well as I can.——<i>Trim</i>, I assure you, was the best
scholar in my company, and should have had the next halberd, but for the
poor fellow’s misfortune. Corporal <i>Trim</i> laid his hand upon his
heart, and made an humble bow to his master;—then laying down his
hat upon the floor, and taking up the sermon in his left hand, in order
to have his right at liberty,——he advanced, nothing
doubting, into the middle of the room, where he could best see, and be
best seen by his audience.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
