<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXIX</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-7" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-7-29" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIX</h3>
				<p>I am glad of it, said I, settling the account with myself, as I walk’d into <i>Lyons</i>⁠⸺⁠my chaise being all laid higgledy-piggledy with my baggage in a cart, which was moving slowly before me⁠⸺⁠I am heartily glad, said I, that ’tis all broke to pieces; for now I can go directly by water to <i>Avignon</i>, which will carry me on a hundred and twenty miles of my journey, and not cost me seven livres⁠⸺⁠and from thence, continued I, bringing forwards the account, I can hire a couple of mules⁠—or asses, if I like (for nobody knows me) and cross the plains of <i>Languedoc</i> for almost nothing⁠⸺⁠I shall gain four hundred livres by the misfortune clear into my purse: and pleasure! worth⁠—worth double the money by it. With what velocity, continued I, clapping my two hands together, shall I fly down the rapid <i>Rhone</i>, with the <b>Vivares</b> on my right hand, and <b>Dauphiny</b> on my left, scarce seeing the ancient cities of <b>Vienne</b>, <i>Valence</i>, and <i>Vivieres</i>. What a flame will it rekindle in the lamp, to snatch a blushing grape from the <i>Hermitage</i> and <i xml:lang="fr">Côte roti</i>, as I shoot by the foot of them! and what a fresh spring in the blood! to behold upon the banks advancing and retiring, the castles of romance, whence courteous knights have whilome rescued the distress’d⁠⸺⁠and see vertiginous, the rocks, the mountains, the cataracts, and all the hurry which Nature is in with all her great works about her.</p>
				<p>As I went on thus, methought my chaise, the wreck of which look’d stately enough at the first, insensibly grew less and less in its size; the freshness of the painting was no more⁠—the gilding lost its lustre⁠—and the whole affair appeared so poor in my eyes⁠—so sorry!⁠—so contemptible! and, in a word, so much worse than the abbess of <i>Andoüillets’</i> itself⁠—that I was just opening my mouth to give it to the devil⁠—when a pert vamping chaise-undertaker, stepping nimbly across the street, demanded if Monsieur would have his chaise refitted⁠⸺⁠No, no, said I, shaking my head sideways⁠—Would Monsieur choose to sell it? rejoined the undertaker.⁠—With all my soul, said I⁠—the iron work is worth forty livres⁠—and the glasses worth forty more⁠—and the leather you may take to live on.</p>
				<p>What a mine of wealth, quoth I, as he counted me the money, has this post-chaise brought me in? And this is my usual method of bookkeeping, at least with the disasters of life⁠—making a penny of every one of ’em as they happen to me⁠⸺⁠</p>
				<p>⸺⁠Do, my dear <i>Jenny</i>, tell the world for me, how I behaved under one, the most oppressive of its kind, which could befal me as a man, proud as he ought to be of his manhood⁠⸺⁠</p>
				<p>’Tis enough, saidst thou, coming close up to me, as I stood with my garters in my hand, reflecting upon what had <em>not</em> pass’d⁠⸺’Tis enough, <i>Tristram</i>, and I am satisfied, saidst thou, whispering these words in my ear, **** ** **** *** ******;⁠—**** ** **⁠⸺⁠any other man would have sunk down to the center⁠⸺⁠</p>
				<p>⸺⁠Everything is good for something, quoth I.</p>
				<p>⸺⁠I’ll go into <i>Wales</i> for six weeks, and drink goat’s whey⁠—and I’ll gain seven years longer life for the accident. For which reason I think myself inexcusable, for blaming fortune so often as I have done, for pelting me all my life long, like an ungracious duchess, as I call’d her, with so many small evils: surely, if I have any cause to be angry with her, ’tis that she has not sent me great ones⁠—a score of good cursed, bouncing losses, would have been as good as a pension to me.</p>
				<p>⸺⁠One of a hundred a year, or so, is all I wish⁠—I would not be at the plague of paying land-tax for a larger.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
