<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 7</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-7" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-7-7" epub:type="chapter">
				<h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">VII</h2>
				<p>——Boulogne!——hah!——so we are all got together——debtors and sinners before heaven; a jolly set of us—but I can’t stay and quaff it off with you—I’m pursued myself like a hundred devils, and shall be overtaken, before I can well change horses:——for heaven’s sake, make haste——’Tis for high-treason, quoth a very little man, whispering as low as he could to a very tall man, that stood next him——Or else for murder; quoth the tall man——Well thrown, <i>Size-ace!</i> quoth I. No; quoth a third, the gentleman has been committing——.</p>
				<p><i>Ah! ma chere fille!</i> said I, as she tripp’d by from her matins—you look as rosy as the morning (for the sun was rising, and it made the compliment the more gracious)—No; it can’t be that, quoth a fourth——(she made a curt’sy to me—I kiss’d my hand) ’tis debt, continued he: ’Tis certainly for debt; quoth a fifth; I would not pay that gentleman’s debts, quoth <i>Ace</i>, for a thousand pounds; nor would I, quoth <i>Size</i>, for six times the sum—Well thrown, <i>Size-ace</i>, again! quoth I;—but I have no debt but the debt of <span class="smallcaps">Nature</span>, and I want but patience of her, and I will pay her every farthing I owe her——How can you be so hard-hearted, <span class="smallcaps">Madam</span>, to arrest a poor traveller going along without molestation to any one upon his lawful occasions? do stop that death-looking, long-striding scoundrel of a scare-sinner, who is posting after me——he never would have followed me but for you——if it be but for a stage or two, just to give me start of him, I beseech you, madam——do, dear <span class="locked">lady——</span></p>
				<p>——Now, in troth, ’tis a great pity, quoth mine <i>Irish</i> host, that all this good courtship should be lost; for the young gentlewoman has been after going out of hearing of it all <span class="locked">along.——</span></p>
				<p>——Simpleton! quoth I.</p>
				<p>——So you have nothing <i>else</i> in <i>Boulogne</i> worth seeing?</p>
				<p>—By Jasus! there is the finest <span class="smallcaps">Seminary</span> for the <span class="smallcaps">Humanities</span>——</p>
				<p>—There cannot be a finer; quoth I.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
