<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-3" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-3-12" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XII</h3>
				<p>Now don’t let us give ourselves a parcel of airs, and pretend that the oaths we make free with in this land of liberty of ours are our own; and because we have the spirit to swear them,⁠⸺⁠imagine that we have had the wit to invent them too.</p>
				<p>I’ll undertake this moment to prove it to any man in the world, except to a connoisseur:⁠⸺⁠though I declare I object only to a connoisseur in swearing,⁠⸺⁠as I would do to a connoisseur in painting, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, the whole set of ’em are so hung round and <em>befetish’d</em> with the bobs and trinkets of criticism,⁠⸺⁠or to drop my metaphor, which by the bye is a pity,⁠⸺⁠for I have fetch’d it as far as from the coast of <i>Guiney</i>;⁠—their heads, Sir, are stuck so full of rules and compasses, and have that eternal propensity to apply them upon all occasions, that a work of genius had better go to the devil at once, than stand to be prick’d and tortured to death by ’em.</p>
				<p>—And how did <i>Garrick</i> speak the soliloquy last night?⁠—Oh, against all rule, my lord,⁠—most ungrammatically! betwixt the substantive and the adjective, which should agree together in <em>number</em>, <em>case</em>, and <em>gender</em>, he made a breach thus,⁠—stopping, as if the point wanted settling;⁠—and betwixt the nominative case, which your lordship knows should govern the verb, he suspended his voice in the epilogue a dozen times three seconds and three-fifths by a stopwatch, my lord, each time,⁠—Admirable grammarian!⁠⸺⁠But in suspending his voice⁠⸺⁠was the sense suspended likewise? Did no expression of attitude or countenance fill up the chasm?⁠⸺⁠Was the eye silent? Did you narrowly look?⁠⸻I look’d only at the stopwatch, my lord.⁠—Excellent observer!</p>
				<p>And what of this new book the whole world makes such a rout about?⁠⸺⁠Oh! ’tis out of all plumb, my lord,⁠⸺⁠quite an irregular thing!⁠—not one of the angles at the four corners was a right angle.⁠—I had my rule and compasses, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, my lord, in my pocket.⁠—Excellent critick!</p>
				<p>⸺⁠And for the epick poem your lordship bid me look at⁠⸺⁠upon taking the length, breadth, height, and depth of it, and trying them at home upon an exact scale of <i>Bossu’s</i>⁠⸺’tis out, my lord, in every one of its dimensions.⁠—Admirable connoisseur!</p>
				<p>⸺⁠And did you step in, to take a look at the grand picture in your way back?⁠—’Tis a melancholy daub! my lord; not one principle of the <em>pyramid</em> in any one group!⁠⸺⁠and what a price!⁠⸺⁠for there is nothing of the colouring of <i>Titian</i>⁠—the expression of <i>Rubens</i>⁠—the grace of <i>Raphael</i>⁠—the purity of <i>Dominichino</i>⁠—the <em>corregiescity</em> of <i>Corregio</i>⁠—the learning of <i>Poussin</i>⁠—the airs of <i>Guido</i>⁠—the taste of the <i>Carrachis</i>⁠—or the grand contour of <i>Angela</i>.⁠—Grant me patience, just Heaven!⁠—Of all the cants which are canted in this canting world⁠—though the cant of hypocrites may be the worst⁠⸺⁠the cant of criticism is the most tormenting!</p>
				<p>I would go fifty miles on foot, for I have not a horse worth riding on, to kiss the hand of that man whose generous heart will give up the reins of his imagination into his author’s hands⁠⸺⁠be pleased he knows not why, and cares not wherefore.</p>
				<p>Great <i>Apollo!</i> if thou art in a giving humour⁠—give me⁠—I ask no more, but one stroke of native humour, with a single spark of thy own fire along with it⁠⸺⁠and send <i>Mercury</i>, with the <em>rules and compasses</em>, if he can be spared, with my compliments to⁠—no matter.</p>
				<p>Now to anyone else I will undertake to prove, that all the oaths and imprecations which we have been puffing off upon the world for these two hundred and fifty years last past as originals⁠⸺⁠except <abbr>St.</abbr> <i>Paul’s</i> <em>thumb</em>⁠⸺⁠<em>God’s flesh and God’s fish</em>, which were oaths monarchical, and, considering who made them, not much amiss; and as kings’ oaths, ’tis not much matter whether they were fish or flesh;⁠—else I say, there is not an oath, or at least a curse amongst them, which has not been copied over and over again out of <i>Ernulphus</i> a thousand times: but, like all other copies, how infinitely short of the force and spirit of the original!⁠—It is thought to be no bad oath⁠⸺⁠and by itself passes very well⁠—“<em>G⁠⸺⁠d damn you.</em>”⁠—Set it beside <i>Ernulphus’s</i>⁠⸺“God Almighty the Father damn you⁠—God the Son damn you⁠—God the Holy Ghost damn you”⁠—you see ’tis nothing.⁠—There is an orientality in his, we cannot rise up to: besides, he is more copious in his invention⁠—possess’d more of the excellencies of a swearer⁠⸺⁠had such a thorough knowledge of the human frame, its membranes, nerves, ligaments, knittings of the joints, and articulations,⁠⸺⁠that when <i>Ernulphus</i> cursed⁠—no part escaped him.⁠—’Tis true there is something of a <em>hardness</em> in his manner⁠⸺⁠and, as in <i>Michaelangelo</i>, a want of <em>grace</em>⁠⸺⁠but then there is such a greatness of <em>gusto</em>!</p>
				<p>My father, who generally look’d upon everything in a light very different from all mankind, would, after all, never allow this to be an original.⁠⸺⁠He considered rather, <i>Ernulphus’s</i> anathema, as an institute of swearing, in which, as he suspected, upon the decline of <em>swearing</em> in some milder pontificate, <i>Ernulphus</i>, by order of the succeeding pope, had with great learning and diligence collected together all the laws of it;⁠—for the same reason that <i>Justinian</i>, in the decline of the empire, had ordered his chancellor <i>Tribonian</i> to collect the <i>Roman</i> or civil laws all together into one code or digest⁠⸺⁠lest, through the rust of time⁠⸺⁠and the fatality of all things committed to oral tradition⁠—they should be lost to the world forever.</p>
				<p>For this reason my father would ofttimes affirm, there was not an oath, from the great and tremendous oath of <i>William</i> the Conqueror (<em>By the splendour of God</em>) down to the lowest oath of a scavenger (<em>Damn your eyes</em>) which was not to be found in <i>Ernulphus</i>.⁠—In short, he would add⁠—I defy a man to swear <em>out</em> of it.</p>
				<p>The hypothesis is, like most of my father’s, singular and ingenious too;⁠⸺⁠nor have I any objection to it, but that it overturns my own.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
