<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 13</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-4" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-4-13" epub:type="chapter">
				<h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XIII</h2>
				<p>Holla!⁠⸺⁠you, chairman!⁠⸺⁠here’s sixpence⁠⸺⁠do step into that bookseller’s shop, and call me a <em>day-tall</em> critick. I am very willing to give any one of ’em a crown to help me with his tackling, to get my father and my uncle <i>Toby</i> off the stairs, and to put them to bed.</p>
				<p>—’Tis even high time; for except a short nap, which they both got whilst <i>Trim</i> was boring the jackboots⁠—and which, by the bye, did my father no sort of good, upon the score of the bad hinge⁠—they have not else shut their eyes, since nine hours before the time that <abbr>Dr.</abbr> <i>Slop</i> was led into the back parlour in that dirty pickle by <i>Obadiah</i>.</p>
				<p>Was every day of my life to be as busy a day as this⁠—and to take up⁠—Truce.</p>
				<p>I will not finish that sentence till I have made an observation upon the strange state of affairs between the reader and myself, just as things stand at present⁠—an observation never applicable before to any one biographical writer since the creation of the world, but to myself⁠—and I believe, will never hold good to any other, until its final destruction⁠—and therefore, for the very novelty of it alone, it must be worth your worships attending to.</p>
				<p>I am this month one whole year older than I was this time twelvemonth; and having got, as you perceive, almost into the middle of my fourth volume<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-15" id="noteref-15" epub:type="noteref">15</a>⁠—and no farther than to my first day’s life⁠—’tis demonstrative that I have three hundred and sixty-four days more life to write just now, than when I first set out; so that instead of advancing, as a common writer, in my work with what I have been doing at it⁠—on the contrary, I am just thrown so many volumes back⁠—was every day of my life to be as busy a day as this⁠—And why not?⁠⸺⁠and the transactions and opinions of it to take up as much description⁠—And for what reason should they be cut short? as at this rate I should just live 364 times faster than I should write⁠—It must follow, an’ please your worships, that the more I write, the more I shall have to write⁠—and consequently, the more your worships read, the more your worships will have to read.</p>
				<p>Will this be good for your worships’ eyes?</p>
				<p>It will do well for mine; and, was it not that my <b>Opinions</b> will be the death of me, I perceive I shall lead a fine life of it out of this selfsame life of mine; or, in other words, shall lead a couple of fine lives together.</p>
				<p>As for the proposal of twelve volumes a year, or a volume a month, it no way alters my prospect⁠—write as I will, and rush as I may into the middle of things, as <i>Horace</i> advises⁠—I shall never overtake myself whipp’d and driven to the last pinch; at the worst I shall have one day the start of my pen⁠—and one day is enough for two volumes⁠⸺⁠and two volumes will be enough for one year.⁠—</p>
				<p>Heaven prosper the manufacturers of paper under this propitious reign, which is now opened to us⁠⸺⁠as I trust its providence will prosper everything else in it that is taken in hand.⁠⸺⁠</p>
				<p>As for the propagation of Geese⁠—I give myself no concern⁠—Nature is all bountiful⁠—I shall never want tools to work with.</p>
				<p>—So then, friend! you have got my father and my uncle <i>Toby</i> off the stairs, and seen them to bed?⁠⸻And how did you manage it?⁠⸺⁠You dropp’d a curtain at the stair-foot⁠—I thought you had no other way for it⁠⸻Here’s a crown for your trouble.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
