<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>I</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-3" id="chapter-3-1" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</h3>
			<p>⸺“<em>I wish, <abbr>Dr.</abbr> </em>Slop<em>,</em>” quoth my uncle <i>Toby</i>, (repeating his wish for <abbr>Dr.</abbr> <i>Slop</i> a second time, and with a degree of more zeal and earnestness in his manner of wishing, than he had wished at first<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-6" id="noteref-6" epub:type="noteref">6</a>)⁠⸺“<em>I wish, <abbr>Dr.</abbr> </em>Slop<em>,</em>” quoth my uncle <i>Toby</i>, “<em>you had seen what prodigious armies we had in</em> Flanders.”</p>
			<p>My uncle <i>Toby’s</i> wish did <abbr>Dr.</abbr> <i>Slop</i> a disservice which his heart never intended any man,⁠—Sir, it confounded him⁠⸺⁠and thereby putting his ideas first into confusion, and then to flight, he could not rally them again for the soul of him.</p>
			<p>In all disputes,⁠⸺⁠male or female,⁠⸺⁠whether for honour, for profit, or for love,⁠—it makes no difference in the case;⁠—nothing is more dangerous, Madam, than a wish coming sideways in this unexpected manner upon a man: the safest way in general to take off the force of the wish, is for the party wish’d at, instantly to get upon his legs⁠—and wish the <em>wisher</em> something in return, of pretty near the same value,⁠⸺⁠so balancing the account upon the spot, you stand as you were⁠—nay sometimes gain the advantage of the attack by it.</p>
			<p>This will be fully illustrated to the world in my chapter of wishes.⁠—</p>
			<p><abbr>Dr.</abbr> <i>Slop</i> did not understand the nature of this defence;⁠—he was puzzled with it, and it put an entire stop to the dispute for four minutes and a half;⁠—five had been fatal to it:⁠—my father saw the danger⁠—the dispute was one of the most interesting disputes in the world, “Whether the child of his prayers and endeavours should be born without a head or with one:”⁠—he waited to the last moment, to allow <abbr>Dr.</abbr> <i>Slop</i>, in whose behalf the wish was made, his right of returning it; but perceiving, I say, that he was confounded, and continued looking with that perplexed vacuity of eye which puzzled souls generally stare with⁠—first in my uncle <i>Toby’s</i> face⁠—then in his⁠—then up⁠—then down⁠—then east⁠—east and by east, and so on,⁠⸺⁠coasting it along by the plinth of the wainscot till he had got to the opposite point of the compass,⁠⸺⁠and that he had actually begun to count the brass nails upon the arm of his chair,⁠—my father thought there was no time to be lost with my uncle <i>Toby</i>, so took up the discourse as follows.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
