<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Endnotes</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="backmatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="endnotes" epub:type="endnotes">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Endnotes</h2>
			<ol>
				<li id="note-1" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>It is perhaps barely necessary to observe that the parallel does not extend to a further parallel between republication and talebearing. Once published, the thing is public. <a href="introduction.xhtml#noteref-1" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The <i>Romish</i> Rituals direct the baptizing of the child, in cases of danger, <i>before</i> it is born;⁠—but upon this proviso, That some part or other of the child’s body be seen by the baptizer:⁠⸺⁠But the Doctors of the <i>Sorbonne</i>, by a deliberation held amongst them, <i>April</i> 10, 1733,⁠—have enlarged the powers of the midwives, by determining, That though no part of the child’s body should appear,⁠⸺⁠that baptism shall, nevertheless, be administered to it by injection,⁠—<i xml:lang="fr">par le moyen d’une petite canulle,⁠—Anglicè</i> <em>a squirt</em>.⁠⸺’Tis very strange that <abbr>St.</abbr> <i>Thomas Aquinas</i>, who had so good a mechanical head, both for tying and untying the knots of school-divinity,⁠—should, after so much pains bestowed upon this,⁠—give up the point at last, as a second <i xml:lang="fr">La chose impossible</i>,⁠—“<i xml:lang="la">Infantes in maternis uteris existentes (quoth <abbr>St.</abbr> <i>Thomas!</i>) baptizari possunt <em>nullo modo</em></i>.”⁠—O <i>Thomas! Thomas!</i></p>
					<p>If the reader has the curiosity to see the question upon baptism <em>by injection</em>, as presented to the Doctors of the <i>Sorbonne</i>, with their consultation thereupon, it is as follows.</p>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-1-20.xhtml#noteref-2" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-3" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Vide Deventer, Paris <abbr>edit.</abbr>, 4to, 1734, <abbr>p.</abbr> 366. <a href="chapter-1-20.xhtml#noteref-3" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-4" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pentagraph, an instrument to copy Prints and Pictures mechanically, and in any proportion. <a href="chapter-1-23.xhtml#noteref-4" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-5" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The author is here twice mistaken; for <i>Lithopædus</i> should be wrote thus, <i>Lithopædii Senonensis Icon</i>. The second mistake is, that this <i>Lithopædus</i> is not an author, but a drawing of a petrified child. The account of this, published by <i>Athosius</i> 1580, may be seen at the end of <i>Cordæus’s</i> works in <i>Spachius</i>. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <i>Tristram Shandy</i> has been led into this error, either from seeing <i>Lithopædus’s</i> name of late in a catalogue of learned writers in <abbr>Dr.</abbr> ⸻, or by mistaking <i>Lithopædus</i> for <i>Trinecavellius</i>,⁠⸺⁠from the too great similitude of the names. <a href="chapter-2-19.xhtml#noteref-5" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-6" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Vide <a href="chapter-2-18.xhtml">book 2, chapter 18</a>. <a href="chapter-3-1.xhtml#noteref-6" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>As the genuineness of the consultation of the <i>Sorbonne</i> upon the question of baptism, was doubted by some, and denied by others⁠⸺’twas thought proper to print the original of this excommunication; for the copy of which <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <i>Shandy</i> returns thanks to the chapter clerk of the dean and chapter of <i>Rochester</i>. <a href="chapter-3-11-la.xhtml#noteref-7" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-8" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Vide Locke. <a href="chapter-3-18.xhtml#noteref-8" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-9" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>As <i>Hafen Slawkenbergius de Nasis</i> is extremely scarce, it may not be unacceptable to the learned reader to see the specimen of a few pages of his original; I will make no reflection upon it, but that his story-telling Latin is much more concise than his philosophic⁠—and, I think, has more of Latinity in it. <a href="slawkenbergius-la.xhtml#noteref-9" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-10" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Hafen Slawkenbergius</i> means the Benedictine nuns of <i>Cluny</i>, founded in the year 940, by <i>Odo</i>, abbé de <i>Cluny</i>. <a href="slawkenbergius-en.xhtml#noteref-10" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-11" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> <i>Shandy’s</i> compliments to orators⁠⸺⁠is very sensible that <i>Slawkenbergius</i> has here changed his metaphor⁠⸻which he is very guilty of:⁠⸺⁠that as a translator, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <i>Shandy</i> has all along done what he could to make him stick to it⁠—but that here ’twas impossible. <a href="slawkenbergius-en.xhtml#noteref-11" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-12" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>
						<i xml:lang="la">Nonnulli ex nostratibus eadem loquendi formulâ <abbr>utun.</abbr> Quinimo &amp; Logistæ &amp; Canonistæ⁠⸺⁠Vid. Parce Barne Jas in <abbr>d. L.</abbr> Provincial. <abbr>Constitut.</abbr> de <abbr>conjec. vid. Vol. Lib.</abbr> 4. <abbr>Titul.</abbr> 1. <abbr>n.</abbr> 7. quâ etiam in re conspir. Om de Promontorio <abbr>Nas. Tichmak. ff. d. tit.</abbr> 3. <abbr>fol.</abbr> 189. <abbr>passim. Vid. Glos.</abbr> de <abbr>contrahend.</abbr> empt, <abbr>etc.</abbr> necnon <abbr class="name">J.</abbr> Scrudr, in cap. § <abbr>refut.</abbr> per totum. Cum his <abbr>cons.</abbr> <abbr>Rever.</abbr> <abbr class="name">J.</abbr> Tubal, <abbr>Sentent.</abbr> &amp; <abbr>Prov.</abbr> <abbr>cap.</abbr> 9. <abbr>ff.</abbr> 11, 12. <abbr>obiter.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span> &amp; Librum, cui <abbr>Tit.</abbr> de Terris &amp; <abbr>Phras. Belg.</abbr> ad finem, cum comment, <abbr>N.</abbr> Bardy <abbr>Belg. Vid. Scrip. Argentotarens.</abbr> de <abbr>Antiq. Ecc.</abbr> in <abbr>Episc. Archiv.</abbr> fid <abbr>coll.</abbr> per Von Jacobum Koinshoven Folio Argent. 1583. <abbr>præcip.</abbr> ad finem. Quibus <abbr>add.</abbr> Rebuff in <abbr>L.</abbr> obvenire de <abbr>Signif. Nom. ff. fol.</abbr> &amp; de jure <abbr>Gent.</abbr> &amp; <abbr>Civil.</abbr> de <abbr>protib.</abbr> aliena <abbr>feud.</abbr> per federa, <abbr>test.</abbr> <abbr class="name">Joha.</abbr> Luxius in prolegom, quem velim videas, de <abbr>Analy. Cap.</abbr> 1, 2, 3. <abbr>Vid.</abbr> Idea.</i>
						<a href="slawkenbergius-en.xhtml#noteref-12" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-13" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote>
						<p>
							<i xml:lang="la">Hæc mira, satisque horrenda. Planetarum coitio sub Scorpio Asterismo in nona cœli statione, quam Arabes religioni deputabant efficit <i>Martinum Lutherum</i> sacrilegum hereticum, Christianæ religionis hostem acerrimum atque prophanum, ex horoscopi directione ad Martis coitum, religiosissimus obiit, ejus Anima scelestissima ad infernos navigavit⁠—ab Alecto, Tisiphone &amp; Megara flagellis igneis cruciata perenniter.</i>
						</p>
						<cite>⸺⁠Lucas Gaurieus in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la">Tractatu astrologico de præteritis multorum hominum accidentibus per genituras examinatis</i></cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="slawkenbergius-en.xhtml#noteref-13" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-14" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>
						<i xml:lang="fr"><i>Ce Fœtus</i> n’étoit pas plus grand que la paume de la main; mais son père l’ayant éxaminé en qualité de Médecin, &amp; ayant trouvé que c’etoit quâlque chose de plus qu’un Embryon, le fit transporter tout vivant à Rapallo, ou il le fit voir à Jerôme Bardi &amp; à d’autres Médecins du lieu. On trouva qu’il ne lui manquoit rien d’essentiel à la vie; &amp; son père pour faire voir un essai de son experience, entreprit d’achever l’ouvrage de la Nature, &amp; de travailler à la formation de l’Enfant avec le même artifice que celui dont on se sert pour faire écclorre les Poulets en Egypte. Il instruisit une Nourisse de tout ce qu’elle avoit à faire, &amp; ayant fait mettre son fils dans un pour proprement accommodé, il reussit à l’élever &amp; à lui faire prendre ses accroissemens necessaires, par l’uniformité d’une chaleur étrangere mesurée éxactement sur les dégrés d’un Thermométre, ou d’un autre instrument équivalent. (Vide <abbr class="name">Mich.</abbr> Giustinian, ne gli Scritt. Liguri à Cart. 223. 488.)</i>
					</p>
					<p>
						<i xml:lang="fr">On auroit toujours été très satisfait de l’industrie d’un père si experimenté dans l’Art de la Generation, quand il n’auroit pû prolonger la vie à son fils que pour quelques mois, ou pour peu d’années.</i>
					</p>
					<p>
						<i xml:lang="fr">Mais quand on se represente que l’Enfant a vecu près de quatre-vingts ans, &amp; qu’il a composé quatre-vingts Ouvrages differents tous fruits d’une longue lecture⁠—il faut convenir que tout ce qui est incroyable n’est pas toujours faux, &amp; que la <em>Vraisemblance n’est pas toujours du côté de la Verité</em>.</i>
					</p>
					<p>
						<i xml:lang="fr">Il n’avoit que dix neuf ans lorsqu’il composa <i epub:type="se:name.publication.paper">Gonopsychanthropologia de Origine Animæ humanæ</i>.</i>
					</p>
					<p>
						<i xml:lang="fr">(Les Enfans celebres, revûs &amp; corrigés par <abbr>M.</abbr> de la Monnoye de l’Academie Françoise.)</i>
						<a href="chapter-4-10.xhtml#noteref-14" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-15" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Vide Menagiana, <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>. <a href="chapter-4-21.xhtml#noteref-15" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-16" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Vide Swinburn on Testaments, Part 7, §8. <a href="chapter-4-29.xhtml#noteref-16" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-17" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Vide Brook, <abbr>Abridg. Tit. Administr. N.</abbr> 47. <a href="chapter-4-29.xhtml#noteref-17" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-18" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>
						<i xml:lang="la">Mater non numeratur inter consanguineos, <abbr>Bald.</abbr> in <abbr>ult. C.</abbr> de <abbr>Verb.</abbr> <abbr class="eoc">signific.</abbr></i>
						<a href="chapter-4-29.xhtml#noteref-18" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-19" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Vide Brook, <abbr>Abridg. Tit. Administr. N.</abbr> 47. <a href="chapter-4-29.xhtml#noteref-19" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-20" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Volumes <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span> and <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span> in the first Edition. <a href="part-5-dedication.xhtml#noteref-20" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-21" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This book my father would never consent to publish; ’tis in manuscript, with some other tracts of his, in the family, all, or most of which will be printed in due time. <a href="chapter-5-12.xhtml#noteref-21" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-22" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> <i>Shandy</i> is supposed to mean ******** *** <abbr>Esq.</abbr>; member for ******,⁠⸺⁠and not the <i>Chinese</i> Legislator. <a href="chapter-5-25.xhtml#noteref-22" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-23" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="el">Χαλεπῆς νόσου, καὶ δυσιάτου ἀπαλλαγὴν, ἣν ἄνθρακα καλοῦσιν.</span>⁠—<b>Philo</b>. <a href="chapter-5-28.xhtml#noteref-23" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-24" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>
						<span xml:lang="el">Τὰ τεμνόμενα τῶν ἐθνῶν τολυγονώτατα, καὶ πολυανθρωπότατα εἶναι.</span>
						<a href="chapter-5-28.xhtml#noteref-24" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-25" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="el">Καθαριότητος εἵνεκεν.</span>⁠—<b>Bochart</b>. <a href="chapter-5-28.xhtml#noteref-25" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-26" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="el">Ὁ Ἶλος, τὰ αἰδοῖα περιτέμνεται, ταὐτὸ ποιῆσαι καὶ τοὺς ἅμ’ αυτῷ συμμάχους καταναγκάσας.</span>⁠—<b>Sanchuniatho.</b> <a href="chapter-5-28.xhtml#noteref-26" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-27" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i xml:lang="fr">Nous aurions quelque interêt</i>, says <i>Baillet</i>, <i xml:lang="fr">de montrer qu’il n’a rien de ridicule s’il étoit veritable, au moins dans le sens énigmatique que <i>Nicius Erythræus</i> a tâché de lui donner. Cet auteur dit que pour comprendre comme <i>Lipse</i>, il a pû composer un ouvrage le premier jour de sa vie, il faut s’imaginer, que ce premier jour n’est pas celui de sa naissance charnelle, mais celui au quel il a commencé d’user de la raison; il veut que ç’ait été à l’âge de <em>neuf</em> ans; et il nous veut persuader que ce fut en cet âge, que <i>Lipse</i> fit un poëme.⁠⸺⁠Le tour est ingénieux,</i> <abbr>etc.</abbr> <abbr>etc.</abbr> <a href="chapter-6-2.xhtml#noteref-27" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-28" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Vid.</abbr> <i>Pellegrina</i>. <a href="chapter-6-5.xhtml#noteref-28" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-29" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Vid.</abbr> Book of French post roads, page 36, edition of 1762. <a href="chapter-7-10.xhtml#noteref-29" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-30" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Chief Magistrate in Toulouse, <abbr>etc.</abbr> <abbr>etc.</abbr> <abbr>etc.</abbr> <a href="chapter-7-17.xhtml#noteref-30" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-31" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>
						<i xml:lang="la">Non orbis gentem, non urbem gens habet ullam</i>
					</p>
					<p>
						<i xml:lang="la">⸺⸺⁠⸺⸺⁠ulla parem.</i>
						<a href="chapter-7-18.xhtml#noteref-31" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-32" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The same Don <i>Pringello</i>, the celebrated <i>Spanish</i> architect, of whom my cousin <i>Antony</i> has made such honourable mention in a scholium to the Tale inscribed to his name.⁠—<abbr>Vid.</abbr> <abbr>p.</abbr> 129, small edit. <a href="chapter-7-28.xhtml#noteref-32" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-33" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Vid.</abbr> <a href="chapter-6-40.xhtml">book 6, chapter 40</a>. <a href="chapter-8-1.xhtml#noteref-33" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-34" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Vid.</abbr> <i>Pope’s</i> Portrait. <a href="chapter-8-2.xhtml#noteref-34" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-35" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i xml:lang="la"><i>Rodope Thracia</i> tam inevitabili fascino instructa, tam exactè oculus intuens attraxit, ut si in illam quis incidisset, fieri non posset, quin caperetur.</i>⁠⸺⁠I know not who. <a href="chapter-8-24.xhtml#noteref-35" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-36" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This will be printed with my father’s Life of <i>Socrates</i>, <abbr>etc.</abbr> <abbr>etc.</abbr> <a href="chapter-8-26.xhtml#noteref-36" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-37" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> <i>Shandy</i> must mean the poor <em>in spirit</em>; inasmuch as they divided the money amongst themselves. <a href="chapter-8-26.xhtml#noteref-37" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-38" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>He lost his hand at the battle of <i>Lepanto</i>. <a href="chapter-9-24.xhtml#noteref-38" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-39" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This must be a mistake in <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <i>Shandy</i>; for <i>Graaf</i> wrote upon the pancreatick juice, and the parts of generation. <a href="chapter-9-26.xhtml#noteref-39" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
			</ol>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
